

=== Page 1 ===

‘CAMBRIDGE

UNIVERSITY PRESS.



=== Page 2 ===

Cambridge Certificate
of Proficiency in English
2

WITH ANSWERS

Examination papers from the
University of Cambridge
Local Examinations Syndicate

3 CAMBRIDGE
Ep UNIVERSITY PRESS



=== Page 3 ===

PUBLISHED BY THE PRESS SYNDICATE OF THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE
The Pitt Building, Trumpington Street, Cambridge, United Kingdom

Contents

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS

The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 2RU, UK

40 West 20th Street, New York NY 10011-4211, USA

477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, VIC 3207, Australia
Ruiz de Alarcén, 28014 Madrid, Spain

Dock House, The Waterfront, Cape Town 8001, South Africa

Thanks and acknowledgements iv

To the student 1

http://www.cambridge.org

. a Test i Paper i Reading 4
© Cambridge University Press 2002

Paper 2 Writing 14

Paper 3 Use of English 16
Paper 4 Listening 24
Paper 5 Speaking 29

This book is in copyright, which normally means that
no reproduction of any part may take place without
the written permission of Cambridge University Press.
The copying of certain parts of it by individuals

for use within the classroom, however, is permitted
without such formality. Pages which are copiable
without further permission are identified by a
separate copyright notice:

© UCLES K&J
First published 2002

Test2 Paper1 Reading 30
Paper2 Writing 41
Paper 3 Use of English 44
Paper 4 Listening 52
Paper 5 Speaking 57

Printed in the United Kingdom at the University Press, Cambridge

ISBN 0 521 01168 X Student’s Book

ISBN 0 521 75109 8 Student’s Book with answers

ISBN 0 521 75104 7 Self-study Pack

ISBN 0 521 75107 1 Teacher’s Book

ISBN 0 521 75106 3 Set of 2 Cassettes

ISBN 0 521 75105 5 Set of 2 Audio CDs

Test3  Paperi Reading 58
Paper 2 Writing 68
Paper 3 Use of English 70
Paper 4 Listening 78
Paper5 Speaking 83

Test4  Paper1 Reading 84
Paper 2 Writing 95
Paper 3 Use of English 98
Paper 4 Listening 106
Paper 5 Speaking 111
Test i Key and transcript 112
Tesi 2 Key and transcript 124
Test3 Key and transcript 136
Test4 Key and transcript 148

Visual materials for Paper 5 colour section

Sample answer sheets 160



=== Page 4 ===

Thanks and acknowledgements

‘The publishers are grateful to the following for permission
to reproduce copyright material. It has not always been
possible to identify the sources of all the material used and
in such cases the publishers would welcome information
from the copyright owners.

The New Internationalist for p. 4: ‘The Cost of Coo?’ by Michael
Peel © The New Internationalist; Independent for p. 5: extracted
from an article by Sally Staples, first published in Independent

14 February 1998; Prospect Publishing Led for p. 6: extract from
‘Get out of the Kitchen” by Will Skidelsky, originally published in
Prospect magazine; Gillon Aitken Associates for p. 7: extract from
Risk by A Alvarez © 1991 by A Alvarez; HarperCollins Publishers
for p. 8: extract from The Blessings of a Good Thick Skirt by Mary
Russell. Also for p. 30: extract from pp. 111-12 from Notes from
a Small Island by Bill Bryson, Copyright © 1995 by Bill Bryson;
Curtis Brown Group Ltd for p. 8: extract from The Blessings of a
Good Thick Skirt by Mary Russell, reproduced with permission

of Curtis Brown Group Ltd, London on behalf of Mary Russell,

© Mary Russell 1986; The Peters Fraser and Dunlop Group for

p. 9: reproduced from Funny Water by Frank Kermode (Copyright
© Frank Kermode 2000) in the London Review of Books by
permission of PFD on behalf of Professor Sir Frank Kermode. Also
for p. 12: extract reproduced from The Uses of Error by Frank
Kermode (Copyright © Frank Kermode 1990) by permission of PED
on behalf of Professor Sir Frank Kermode. Also for pp. 92-93:
extract from Brilliant Creatures by Clive James, 1984, reprinted by
permission of PFD on behalf of Clive James; Blackwell Publishers
for pp. 10-11: extract from ‘Rethinking work’ by Theodore Zeldin
© The Chancellor, Masters and Scholars of Oxford University;
Penguin Putnam Inc. for p. 16: extract from DREAM POWER by
Ann Faraday. Used by permission of Coward-McCann, Inc., a
division of Penguin Putnam Inc.; The Random House Group and
‘The Peters Fraser and Dunlop Group for p. 22: extract from ALL
TOGETHER NOW by John Harvey Jones published by
Heinemann, Used by permission of the Random House Group
Limited. PFD on behalf of Sir John Harvey Jones; A. P. Watt Ltd
for p. 23: extract from The Way to Win by Will Carling and Robert
Heller, by permission of A. P. Watt Ltd on behalf of Heller Arts Ltd
and Will Carling. Also for pp. 84-85: extract from The Razor’s
Edge by W Somerset Maugham, reproduced by permission of A. P.
Watt Ltd on behalf of the Royal Literary Fund; Transworld
Publishers for p, 30 © Bill Bryson. Extracted from NOTES FROM
A SMALL ISLAND, published by Transworld Publisher, a division
of the Random House Group Ltd. All rights reserved; Scientific
American for p. 32: adapted from ‘Divided We Fall; Cooperation
among Lions’ by Craig Packer and Anne E. Pussey. Copyright

© May 1997 by Scientific American, Inc. All rights reserved;
Charlotte Raven for p. 31: extract from ‘It does what it says on
the label’ in The Guardian 16/05/2000; The Sunday Times for

p. 33: extract from ‘Crucial Cuts: Blur, Parklife” by Robert Sandalls
Hodder and Stoughton Educational for p. 35: extract from Teach
Yourself Writing a Novel and Getting Published by Nigel Watts,
reproduced by permission of Hodder and Stoughton Educational
Limited; The Guardian for pp, 36-37: extract from ‘Are we getting
enough?’ by Andy Beckett © The Guardian 16/05/2000; Arnold
for pp. 38-39: extract from Television, Broadcasting, Flow: Key
Metaphors in TV Theory (Gripsrud) by Christine Geraghty &

David Lusted (Eds); Philip Allan Updates for p. 51: extract from
“The Right to Roam’ by Susan Care in Psychology Review, February
2000; Telegraph Group Limited for pp. 58-59: extract from ‘The
Best Port in a Storm’ by Jo Knowsley © Telegraph Group Limited
2000. Also for p. 105: extract from ‘Comfort in the Obsolete’ by
Wendy Grossman © Telegraph Group Limited 2000; Archaeology
Today for p. 59: extract from ‘Artificial Anasazi’ by George J.
Gumerman & Jeffrey $. Dean; The Women’s Press for p. 60: extract
from Taking Reality by Surprise by Susan Sellers, published in Great
Britain by The Women’s Press Ltd, 1991, 34 Great Sutton Street,
London. EC1V OLQ; A & C Black for p. 61: extract from Writing
Popular Fiction by Rona Randall, 1997; F & W Publications Inc.
for p. 62: excerpted from The Insider's Guide to Writing for Screen
and Television, Copytight © 1997 by Ronald Tobias. Used with
permission of Writer’s Digest Books, an imprint of F & W
Publications, Inc. All rights reserved; The Geographical

Magazine tor pp. 64-65: extract from ‘The Heat is On’ by Nick
Middleton, extracted from Geographical Vol. 72 No. 1,
www.geographical.co.uk; ITPS Ltd for p. 66: extract from Maps
and Their Makers by G R Crone; Oxford University Press for p. 71:
extract from Social and Cultural Anthropology by John Monaghan
and Peter Just © John Monaghan and Peter Just 2000, by
permission of Oxford University Press; Oneworld Publications

for p. 77: extract from The Fifth Dimension © John Hick, 1999.
Reproduced by permission of Oneworld Publications; Pearson
Education Limited for p. 86: extract from The Pursuit of History by
John Tosh; Cambridge University Press for p. 87: extract from An
Introduction to Animal Behaviour by Aubrey Manning and Marian
Stamp Dawkins, 1992; Nelson Thornes Ltd for p. 88: extract from
Fundamentals of Sociology by McNeill & Townley; The Associated
Board of the Royal Schools of Music for pp. 90-91: extract from.
‘The Challenge Ahead’ by Dr Susan Hallam. This article first
appeared in Libretto, the journal of The Associated Board of the
Royal Schools of Music, The Economist for p. 104: extract from
“The end of work?’ © The Economist Newspaper Limited, London,
28 September 1996.

Colour section photographs:

Allsport/Julian Herbert: 4D; AP Photos/Lennox McLendon:

3F; Pacific Stock/Bruce Coleman Collection: 4B; Corbis Stock
Market: 3E; Michael Marchant/Environmental Images: 2A,

Steve Morgan/Environmental Images: 2B and 2D, Trevor
Perry/Environmental Images: 2F, Martin Bond/Environmental
Images: 2G; Getty Images/Stephen Derr: 1B, Getty Images/Michael
Rosenfeld: 1D, Getty Images/V.C.L: 1E and 1F, Getty Images/
Paul Chesley: 1G, Getty Images/Ed Pritchard: 2C, Getty Images/
Adri Berger: 3B, Getty Images/Dennis Kitchen: 3C, Getty
Images/Masterfile: 3D, Getty Images/Martine Mouchy: 4A, Getty
Images/Pal Hermansen: 4C; PA Photos/EPA: 1A, PA Photos/Toby
Melville: 1C, PA Photos/David Jones: 4E; Courtesy Planet Organic:
2E; The Photographers Library: 3A.

Picture research by Sandie Huskinson-Rolfe of PHOTOSKEKERS
Cover design by Dunne & Scully

The cassettes and audio CDs which accompany this book were
recorded at Studio AVP, London

To the student

This book is for candidates preparing for the University of Cambridge Local
Examinations Syndicate (UCLES) Certificate of Proficiency in English (CPE)
examination. It contains four complete tests which reflect the most recent CPE
specifications (introduced in December 2002).

The CPE is part of a group of examinations developed by UCLES called the
Cambridge Main Suite. The Main Suite consists of five examinations which
have similar characteristics but which are designed for different levels of English
ability. Within the five levels, CPE is at Cambridge Level 5.

Certificate in Advanced English (CAE)

Cambridge Level 3
First Certificate in English (FCE)

Cambridge Level 2
Preliminary English Test (PET)

Cambridge Level 1
Key English Test (KET)

The CPE examination consists of five papers:

Paper1 | Reading 1 hour 30 minutes

Paper 2 | Writing 2 hours

Paper 3 | Use of English | 1 hour 30 minutes

Paper 4 | Listening 40 minutes (approximately)
Paper 5 | Speaking 19 minutes

Paper 1 Reading ; ;
This paper consists of four parts with 40 questions, which take the form of

three multiple-choice tasks and a gapped text task. Part 1 contains three short
texts, Part 2 contains four short texts and Parts 3 and 4 each contain one
longer text. The texts are taken from fiction, non-fiction, journals, magazines,
newspapers, and promotional and informational materials. This paper is
designed to test candidates’ ability to understand the meaning of written
English at word, phrase, sentence, paragraph and whole text level.



=== Page 5 ===

To the student

Paper 2.. Writing

This. paper consists of two writing tasks in a range of formats (e.g. letter,

report, review, article, essay, proposal). Candidates are asked to complete two

‘tasks, writing between 300 and 350 words for each. Part 1 (Question 1)

~~ “consists of one compulsory task based on instructions and a short text. Part 2
- (Questions 2-5). consists.of one task which candidates select from a choice of

~ four: Question 5 has a‘task on one of each of three set texts. Assessment is

_ based on achievement’of task, range and accuracy of vocabulary and
“grammatical structures, organisation, content and appropriacy of register and

format.

Paper 3. Use of English

This paper consists of five parts with 44 questions. These take the form of an
open cloze, a word formation task, gapped sentences, key word transformations
and two texts with comprehension questions and a summary writing task. The
paper is designed to assess candidates’ ability to demonstrate knowledge and
control of the language system by completing these tasks which are at text and
sentence level.

Paper 4 Listening

This paper consists of four parts with 28 questions, which take the form of two
multiple-choice tasks, a sentence-compiction task and a three-way matching
task. Part 1 contains four short extracts and Parts 2 to 4 each contain one
longer text. The texts are audio-recordings based on a variety of sources
including interviews, discussions, lectures, conversations and documentary
features. The paper is designed to assess candidates’ ability to understand the
meaning of spoken English, to extract information from a spoken text and to
understand speakers’ attitudes and opinions.

Paper 5 Speaking

The Speaking Test consists of three parts, which take the form of an interview
section, a collaborative task and individual long turns with follow-up
discussion. The test is designed to elicit a wide range of language from both
candidates. Candidates are examined in pairs by two examiners, an Interlocutor
and an Assessor. The Assessor awards a mark based on the following criteria:
Grammatical Resource, Lexical Resource, Discourse Management,
Pronunciation and Interactive Communication. The Interlocutor provides a
global mark for the whole test.

To the student

Marks and results
The five CPE papers total 200 marks, after weighting. Each paper is weighted
to 40 marks.

A candidate’s overall CPE grade is based on the total score gained in all
five papers. It is not necessary to achieve a satisfactory level in all five papers
in order to pass the examination. Pass grades are A, B or C, with A being the
highest. D and E are failing grades. The minimum successful performance in
order to achieve Grade C corresponds to about 60% of the total marks.
Every candidate is provided with a Statement of Results which includes a
graphical display of their performance in each paper. These are shown
against the scale Exceptional — Good — Borderline ~ Weak and indicate the
candidate’s relative performance in each paper.

‘Yhe CPE examination is recognised by the majority of British universities
for English language entrance requirements.

Further information
For more information about CPE or any other UCLES examination contact:

EFL Information

University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate
1 Hills Road

Cambridge

CB1 2EU

United Kingdom

Tel: +44 1223 553355

Fax: +44 1223 460278

e-mail: efl@ucles.org.uk
http://www.cambridge-efl.org.uk

In some areas, this information can also be obtained from the British Council.



=== Page 6 ===

Test 1

PAPER 1 READING (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 7

For questions 1~18, read the three texts below and decide which answer (A, B, C or D) best fits
each gap.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

Air-conditioning

There is a chill in the air at Cannons Gym, a favourite lunch-time haunt for City of London workers.
To deal with this summer's unusually high temperatures, the fitness centre has
gone (1) .... with the air-conditioning. (2) .... , in fact, that at quiet times, the gym feels like
somewhere in the Arctic. This is just one example of how the modern world casually (3) .... air-
conditioning. It has become a central feature of work and play, a potent (4) .... of the ability of
humanity to control the climate, or at least modify it.

Many air-conditioned buildings, however, could (5) .... other methods of cooling. They could take
advantage of daylight and natural ventilation and have thicker walls that absorb less heat during
the day and radiate it away at night. These (6) .... may sound obvious, but they can have telling
results and would considerably reduce the need for air-conditioning.

1 A overweight B overboard ¢ overtime D_ overblown
2 A So much so B Soasto € So to speak D So be it

3 A malfunctions B  outdoes C superimposes D misuses
4 A symbol B_ token G emblem D label

5 A empower B engage C employ BD enlist

6 A_ outcomes B measures ¢€ resolutions BD actions

Sundials

Itis surely more than coincidence that the beginning of a new millennium is being (7) .... by renewed
interest in sundials: instruments used to measure time according to the position of the sun. A
hundred years ago, they were a vital time-keeping (8) .... , essential for anyone who hoped to keep

4

4
-

Paper 1 Reading

their clocks working accurately. Then, as clocks and watches became more sophisticated and
reliable, the sundial was relegated to the (9) .... of garden ornament — a romantic and intriguing
ornament, but (10) .... an anachronism, in a brave new technological age. Now the clock has been
turned back and they are again being taken seriously.

David Harber, a sundial maker, believes that their appeal (11) .... in their direct link with the planets.
He says that when he delivers one, there is a (12) .... of magic when it starts working. They are
still, calm, romantic objects that remind us of our place in the cosmos.

7 A associated B accompanied C acquainted D aroused
8 A device B utensil CG piece Ditem

9 A cluster B set C group Dsstatus
10 A conversely B after all CG nonetheless D- inturn
11 A stands B displays C evolves D lies

12 A moment B point Cc time D pause

Paint Your Own China

My image of china-painting (13) .... from a visit, long ago, to an arts and crafts exhibition where
stern-looking grey-haired ladies demonstrated how to cover a teacup with delicate flowers using a
(14) .... of deft brushstrokes. The spectacle was (15) .... , because each stroke formed a perfect
petal or leaf. Their hands never wobbled, the paint never smudged, and the observer might have
concluded that these women had either been (16) .... their art for decades or had been born with
an extraordinary talent for steady precision.

(17) .... of this experience, | wondered what kind of people would have the courage to enrol on a
course in china-painting. Would even the beginners display an (18) .... artistry? In fact, the
atmosphere turned out to be far from intimidating. The students were ail there to have fun and not
even the tutor wanted to paint petals on teacups with the robotic rapidity | had remembered.

13 A stemmed B initiated G commenced D instigated
14 A’ string B collection Cc sseries D procession
15 A_ sensitive B riveting € charismatic D distinctive
16 A practising B exercising € working D_ expressing
17 A’ Inrespect B Carefui C On reflection DBD Mindful

18 A_ intuitive B inward C inverted D integral



=== Page 7 ===

Test 1

You are going to read four extracts which are all concerned in some way with activities. For
questions 18-26, choose the answer (A, B, € or D) which you think fits best according to the text.

Part 2

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

19

20

The Lure of the Kitchen

When I was at university | decided I wanted to be a chef. Among my contemporaries, this
was an unusual choice. Cooking was not one of the plum jobs that most of us wanted. It is,
on the face of it, an unattractive profession. Chefs lead notoriously harsh lives: the work is
long, pressured, menial — and badly paid.

But such considerations didn’t put me off. I was unhappy at university. The work was hard;
the social scene was insular and self-important. Being a chef seemed the perfect antidote to
intellectual and social posturing. It promised a seriousness and integrity lacking in my college

life.

But my desire to cook was not simply a reaction to being a student. ft also expressed an
aesthetic ideal. My first glimpse of this ideal came when I ate a meal at a famous London
restaurant. It was a revelation. I still clearly remember my starter. J finished that meal wanting
to prostrate myself, weeping, at the feet of the chef who had made it. I felt warm and airy for
days afterwards.

After this, I developed an intense desire to uncover the secrets of this strange, fabulous art.
I transformed my student life into an extended preparation for my assault on the culinary
world. My history degree became a hollow pretence, distracting me from my true course.
T acquired my real education haphazardly and deficiently by reading cookbooks, roaming
markets and delicatessens and preparing extravagant meals.

What attracted the writer to the idea of becoming a chef?

He wanted to express his creativity.

The work involved seemed real and worthwhile.
He wanted to stand out from the crowd.

His fellow students were unconvinced by the idea.

Cow}.

How did the writer pursue his study of cookery?

A reluctantiy

B aggressively
Cc ferventiy

D systematically

RG Sa ea deine ak Mesa aid

4

Paper 1

Extract from a nevel

The school’s swimming instructor was an ex-drill sergeant, small and muscle-
bound, with tattooed arms. When I asked him to teach me how to dive, he told
me to sit on the pool’s edge, put my hands above my head and roll forwards,
pushing myself off with my feet. I practised that manoeuvre until the hour was
up. The next visit, he got me standing upright, and diving off the edge. The
instructor was a martinet and every time I surfaced he looked at me with distaste:
‘Don’t look down, look up!’ ‘Keep your legs straight.’ ‘Point your toes I said!’
The next week, I went up onto the high board. It was a fixed board and its front
edge bent slightly downward. It seemed outrageously high as I stood there,
trying to work up my courage. Gradually the echoing voices disappeared and I
felt as if | were cocooned in silence. | waved my arms vaguely in the way I'd been
taught, tried to look up, not down, and launched myself into space. For a brief
moment, I was flying. When I hit the water, | crumpled ignominiously, and my
legs were all over the place. The instructor looked at me with contempt and
shook his head. But even he could not diminish my euphoria. That’s what they
mean by ‘free as a bird’, I thought.

21 The writer remembers his instructor as someone

A who resented him.
8B who inhibited him.
€ who despised his technique.
DBD ~whom he wanted to impress.

22 Which phrase explains the writer's feeling of euphoria (line 15)?

‘cocooned in silence’ (line 11)

‘| crumpled ignominiously’ (line 13)
‘aunched myself into space’ (line 12)
‘twas flying’ (line 13)

000.

Reading

line 11
line 12
line 13

line 15


=== Page 8 ===

Test 1

THE TRAVELLER

To those of us for whom a comfortable bed, running water and the probability
of living at least until tomorrow are of prime importance, the phenomenon of
the traveller appears as incomprehensibie as it is intriguing. Here are people who
have succumbed to the treacherous seduction of the unknown, who actually
choose to put their lives at risk by climbing the sheer and icy face of an avalanche-
ridden mountain; who sail alone in frail craft through towering seas; who will eat
maggots and river insects if nothing more palatable is on offer and who can live,
day and night for months on end, in the shadow and the promise of the unknown.

It is easy to dismiss such people as oddities ~ as indeed they are — to be
relegated to the ranks of the truly eccentric: hermits, freefall divers or indeed
writers. That they exist cannot be denied, but the strange, uncomfortable world
they occupy lies well outside our everyday experience and can be dismissed, we
tell ourselves, as an irrelevancy. We can shrug our shoulders and return
thankfully to our world of microwave ovens and answerphones, glad that the
only risks to our own health are predictable ones such as making a suicidal dash
across a city street.

23 According to the writer, what motivates travellers?

a desire for a solitary existence

a dissatisfaction with modern living
a need to discover new things

a fascination with outdoor life

508 }b

24 The writer emphasises the contrast between his world and that of the traveller by

A likening travellers to freefall divers.

B | illustrating his indifference to travellers.
C mentioning the dangers of city living.

D referring to domestic appliances.

25

26

Paper 1 Reading

SATLING

Jonathan Raban is afraid of the sea, saying it is not his element, which is
probably why he spends so much time on it. He does not claim to be a world-
class sailor, though he is obviously a competent one. His overriding reason for
sailing is that, being a writer, he likes to write about having sailed. Sailing is
guaranteed to provide alarms and achievernents for his pen to celebrate.

Raban’s little boat carries an electronic device that instantly gives mariners
their position to within a few metres, anywhere on the earth’s surface.
Strongly as he approves of this instrument, there is more than a touch of
primitivism in Raban’s attitude to other sea-faring aids. He thinks the
invention of the compass was a disaster, causing a ‘fundamental rift in the
xelationship between man and sea’. Raban maintains that since it came into
use, perhaps a thousand years ago, it has become the main object of the
steersman’s gaze, with the result that he no longer has to study the waves and
feel the sea. And the ocean, once a place with all sorts of things going on in it,
is now reduced to a mere space. Since his job is merely to keep steady on a
course, the helmsman can be replaced for long stretches by an autopilot. This
may be why Raban had time to look so carefully at the waves.

What is Jonathan Raban’s main motivation for sailing?

He needs to conquer his fear of the sea.

He wants to gain recognition as a sailor.

It offers him experiences he can use afterwards.
it provides a contrast to his existence on land.

0UoODUP

What is the writer doing when he talks about the compass in paragraph 2?

>

illustrating Raban’s skills

B questioning Raban’s attitude

C defending Raban’s assumptions
B supporting Raban’s view



=== Page 9 ===

Test 1

Part 3

You are going to read an extract from an article. Seven paragraphs have been removed from the
extract. Choose from the paragraphs A-H the one which fits each gap (27-33). There is one exira

paragraph which you do not need to use.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

Work

Theodore Zeldin looks at how our working life could change.

Are you as respected and appreciated as you
deserve? Success in a career is no longer enough.
Every projession is complaining that it is not properly
valued or understood, and even among individuals
who have won eminence, there is often bitterness
behind the fame. Loving your work, until recently, was
enough to make you a member of an envied minority.
But now you have to ask yourself what your job is
doing to you as a person, to your mind, character and
relationships.

To counter this, | am trying to discover how work
could have the fulfilment of these aspirations as its
first priority — instead of treating us as clay to be
moulded to suit industrial purposes — and how it could
be reconceived to suit us all, both women and men.
It would have to be not just a way of creating wealth,
but a worthwhile style of life, a path to a fuller
existence, to the discovery of unsuspected talenis
and to a wider variety of human contacts.

Even the middle-class professions, however, no
longer have the liberating appeal they once had.
Doctors are often more stressed than their patients
and complain about the failure of clinical medicine.
Accountants, despite unprecedented influence, are
troubled by doubts about their profession’s ethics.
Most architects never get the chance to exercise their
imaginations freely. Administrators are paralysed by
their own bureaucracy. The middle managers, who
once gloried in their status, are, as a European study
reveals, losing their conviction.

10

| have embarked on an investigation of a wide range
of occupations, one by one, to see how each shapes
arid sometimes destroys those in it. | have studied
how the notion of what humans are capable of has
been expanded in different civilisations, and how
courage can be manufactured. | have applied my
method to the major preoccupations of our
time — happiness, love, friendship and respect.

How many of us can say that we are fully alive at
work? How many of us are really part-time slaves —
theoretically having the right to escape from our
drudgery, but in reality virtual prisoners of our
qualifications and careers, used as instruments by
others, working not so that we might become better
people, but because we can see no other option?
Take hotel workers as an example, since 10 per
cent of the working population is now in the
‘hospitality industry’. The amount of unused potential
is unbelievable. Many highly intelligent and lively
people put up with low prestige, low salaries and long

hours.

A large proportion of hotel staff are foreigners too,
keen to learn a new language and discover a new
civilisation, but they have the most superficial
relations with their guests. Hotels could be cultural
centres, active intermediaries between the guest and
the city, genuine hosts bringing together people who
have not met. Hoteliers could use the knowledge of
the many students they employ, instead of giving
them only menial tasks.

Paper 1 Reading

The time has come to rethink what this term denotes
— from a human, not just a financial angle — and to
move on from traditional categorisations. For me,
work is a relationship. Now that many people are no’
content with relations based on obedience, and
regard work as an assertion of independence or
temperament, they must be given a chance to design
their own jobs, and choose their own colleagues,
even their customers, within the limits of practicality
and profitability.

This is a more intimate encounter, which creates a
bond of respect between the participants, and is
valued as a way of getting inside another person’s
skin, with the likelihoed that one will be changed by
the experience. It is more than a relaxation, because
itis the most effective means of establishing equality.
Every time you have a conversation which achieves
that, the world is changed by a minute amount.

A This means that they have to know how to
converse across the boundaries of professional
jargon, with minds that may at first seem quite
alien. Everybody is clear about the importance of
communication, but itis a very different thing irom
conversation, and traditional conversation is very
different from the new kind of conversation which
people feel the lack of today.

B However, this remodelling would not mean
abolishing unemployment. This is too simple a
goal, because the more people are educated, the
more they demand jobs that are life-enhancing,
interesting and useful. A lifetime of work has to be
seen as a work of art, with the fulfilled individual
at its centre.

€ lf they paid closer attention to their staffs deepest
ambitions, they would realise that there were
many other services that hotels could provide. But
they are restrained by the accountants, who say
that firms, in order to maximise their profits,
should concentrate on one core activity.

D This is because there has been no serious
rethinking of what a hotel is since the days of the
Ritz, with its nineteenth-century idea of luxury. A
hotel is not just a place where travellers sleep, but
a United Nations in miniature. People from all over
the world meet at hotels, though they usually pass
each other in silence.

E Having looked ai those areas, | am now focusing
on the search for more satisfying ways of earning
a living. There is no shortage of experts devoting
themselves to prolonging the life and increasing
the income of corporations and institutions. But
auditing our finances is not enough: we need to
make an audit of ourselves as human beings too,
and discover with what sort of people we want to
spend our lives.

F Meanwhile, the business corporations and public
institutions in which these people work are
slimming. The panaceas of decentralised
decision-making, increasing skills and
performance-related rewards have not succeeded
in winning commitment from employees. In
Britain, only 8 per cent of employees ‘are strongly
of the view that their values and those of their
organisations are very similar’.

G This question is crucial. For however brilliant your
skills, if they make you a bore, unable to converse
with those outside your speciality, if you are so
busy with detail that you have no time to acquire
wisdom or exercise your imagination or humour,
then no amount of status or financial reward will
compensate for your inadequacy as a human
being.

H_ Hotels know so little about their guests ~ and often
about their staff - even though they spend vast
sums on sophisticated iT systems io store the
rather unsophisticated data they collect.
Managers cling to notions of customer service
based on far too simple a view of what produces
‘guest satisfaction’.

11



=== Page 10 ===

Test 1

Part 4

You are going to read an introduction from a book of essays. For questions 34-40, choose the
answer (A, B, C or D) which you think fits best according to the text.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

Writing Reviews

Frank Kermode examines the craft of review-writing from a practitioner’s point of view.

Most reviews are written and circulated under conditions
which ensure that they have a very short active life. There
are deadlines, there are restrictions, normally quite severe,
on their length; and when published they claim houseroom
only for as long as the newspaper they are printed in — a
day or a week, at most a month. Moreover, the literary
status of reviews tends to be settled by their ephemerality.
It is usually supposed, not only by the public but, quite
often, by the writers themselves, that reviewing is work that
nobody would do if there weren’t some reason — shortage
of cash would be cited most often, though another good
reason is that you can’t work all day on a novel ora ‘serious’
book of any sort — which prevents them from occupying
their time with something more valuable.

Yet reviewing is a skilled and multi-faceted job. It is one
thing to be bright, brisk and summarily fair in the six or
eight hundred words of an ordinary newspaper review,
quite another to control, without looseness of argument,
the six or eight thousand words sometimes allowed by
international journals. And the fifteen hundred words of a
leading piece in the weekly magazines present some of the
problems of both short and long. Not that length is the only
consideration. For one thing, the reviewer obviously needs
to think about the probable audience, the weekend
skimmer at one end of the scale, the person already inter-
ested enough in the subject to tackle a serious review-
article at the other. Finally, a reviewer needs to know quite
a bit about quite a number of things; and must be able to
write prose that intelligent people can understand and
enjoy. It follows almost infallibly that the reviewer will be
somebody who writes other things besides reviews.

The American novelist John Updike, who rather looks
down on criticism — ‘hugging the shore’ he calls it —
nevertheless enjoys some coastal reviewing in the intervals
between his transoceanic novel-writing. Understandably
reluctant to allow even his less ambitious voyages to go
without any permanent record, he gathers together his
every review, however short, into volumes with mildly
self-deprecating titles. It might be thought that lesser

12

persons should accept ephemerality as the penalty
appropriate to their coastal caution; but it is hard to see
why, if they can get away with it, they shouldn’t be allowed
to enjoy the measure of permanence, and the measure of
vanity, proper to their station, especially if they believe that
some of their best writing has been ‘buried’ in reviews. I
admit to feeling this about my own work.

My own principal occupation has been academic, and most
of my ‘serious’ books are recognisably academic products,
the sort of thing professors like, and are expected to do as
part of their jobs. However, the English-speaking world (I
think fortunately) acknowledges nothing comparable to the
sharp distinction people from other cultures make between
reviewing and literary study — and so with us it is quite usual
for the same people to do both. The days are gone when
other academics reviled reviewer-professors for unseemly
self-display, or waste of academic time, or betrayal of the
dignity of their institutions. And complaints from non-
professors, to the effect that the professors are taking the
bread out of their mouths, are also less common than they
were, partly because there is so much more reviewing
nowadays that practically everyone can have some, partly,
no doubt, because the bread is often such a meagre ration.

My own view is that these arrangements are good for both
readers — since they can be fairly certain the reviewer has
at least some idea what he is talking about ~ and professors,
if only because the work helps to keep them sane. It also
reminds them that they have a duty, easily neglected, to
make themselves intelligible to non-professors. When
talking among themselves they may feel some need to be
impressively arcane, but when addressing intelligent non-
professors they need to make sure they are communicating
effectively.

Finally, it is clear that for a variety of reasons, and despite
all that can be said to dignify it, reviewing must normally
be a secondary occupation. It is something you can only do
well enough if you are also doing something else well
enough.

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

Paper 1 Reading

What does the writer say about reviews in the first paragraph?

Their topicality means that they are eagerly read.
They may be considered an inferior form of writing.
The best reviews tend to be written by novelists.
They provide writers with a regular income.

900O 0}.

The writer says that a good reviewer is someone who

bears in mind the different types of reader.
has in-depth knowledge of the topic.
concentrates on reviewing as a career.
adopts a clearly defined style.

90 UP

How does John Updike appear to regard review-writing?

He thinks it may help a writer to widen his readership.

He is unwilling to write any reviews himself.

He supports a writer’s right to criticise the work of others.

He considers it an unchallenging, unimaginative type of writing.

90.

How does the writer feel about the less well-known writers who publish their reviews in
book form?

They should leave reviewing to the great writers.
Their best work is to be found in their reviews.
They are entitled to some pride in their work.
They do not deserve long-term success.

vuoODPY

How have attitudes changed towards academics who write reviews?

Non-academics have agreed to share out reviewing work available.

Their colleagues have come to regard it as an acceptable activity.

Less resentment exists now that reviewing can provide a reasonable income.
Greater understanding results from academic standards being less rigorously applied.

GOW FP

Why is the writer in favour of academics also working on reviews?

The general reader is able to rely on their knowledge.
Review-writing is the most enjoyable part of a professor's work.
Feedback gained from non-academics is useful for their research.
Their level of language is appropriate for review-writing.

COU.

In writing this text, the writer's main intention is to

A justify the academic status of reviews.

B defend a particular reviewer.

C_ improve the perception of review-writing.

D encourage other authors to take up review-writing.

13



=== Page 11 ===

Test 1
PAPER 2 WRITING (2 hours)

Part 1

You must answer this question. Write your answer in 300-350 words in an appropriate style.

1 A magazine is inviting readers to send in articles on whether life in the countryside is preferable
to life in the city. You read the personal account below and decide to write an article called
‘Escape to the country — should you?’, responding to the points raised and expressing your own
opinions.

‘When we left the city I was stressed by the pace of life
and travelling to work, and had little time with my
children. I was sure the cleaner air and green spaces
would be good for us. At first it seemed the right move.
There was no commuting, noise or dirt, and our money
went further. But then I discovered that life in the
country also had drawbacks...’

Write your article.

14

TT TT  — ————_——-__—_—«——=__ ''-« *«*_—_—--__

Paper 2 Writing

Part 2

Write an answer to one of the questions 2—5 in this part. Write your answer in 300--350 words in an
appropriate styie.

2 A company wants to launch a new soft drink onto the market, and is running a competition
inviting people to send in proposals for different ways of advertising it. The company wants
people to comment on the use of the media, famous personalities, free gifts, and other
advertising techniques, and explain why they think their ideas will be particularly effective. You
decide to send in a proposal.

Write your proposal.

8 You are a member of your school/college theatre group which has recently performed a play
with great success at an International Festival of Drarna. The editor of your school/college
magazine has asked you to write a review of the International Festival of Drama and say what
you learned from the experience.

Write your review.

4 Your college is producing a handbook to make new students from abroad feel welcome. The
editor has asked you to write a letter for inclusion. The letter should explain how to make the
best use of college facilities (e.g. canteen, library, {T suite, sports hall) and give information and
advice on clubs, societies and student services.

Write your letter. Do not write any postal addresses.

§ Based on your reading of one of these books, write on one of the following.

(a) Anne Tyler: The Accidental Tourist

You see the following comment in a student magazine: ‘There are few books which manage to
be both funny and sad.’ You write a review in which you discuss this comment in relation to The
Accidental Tourist.

Write your review.

(b) John Wyndham: The Day of the Triffids

During a class discussion of The Day of the Triffids, your tutor quotes from the book:

‘There is more to the Triffids than we think’. Your tutor asks you to write an essay in which you
briefly describe the triffids, and outline their role in the novel, discussing their impact on the
society in the novel.

Write your essay.

(c) Graham Greene: Our Man in Havana

A literary journal has published an article which argues that there were no heroes in twentieth-
century English literature. You write a letter to the editor in which you respond to this statement,
referring to Graham Greene’s portrayal of Wormold in Our Man in Havana, stating whether or
not you think he achieves the status of a hero.

Write your letter. Do not write any postal addresses.

| 15



=== Page 12 ===

Test 1
PAPER 3 USE OF ENGLISH (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1

For questions 1-15, read the text below and think of the word which best fits each space. Use only
one word in each space. There is an example at the beginning (0).

Write your answers in CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet.

Exampie: |o||/H/AIVIE

Dreams

Dreams (0) Ave... always fascinated human beings. The idea that dreams provide us with
useful information about our lives goes (1)... thousands of years. For the greater (2)...
of human history (3) .............. was taken for granted that the sleeping mind was in touch with the
supernatural world and dreams were to be interpreted as messages with prophetic or healing

functions. In the nineteenth century, (4) ............. was a widespread reaction (5) ... this way
of thinking and dreams were widely dismissed as being very (6) ............. more than jumbles of

fantasy (7) wo about by memories of the previous day.

It was not (8) the end of the nineteenth century (9) ............. an Austrian neurologist,
Sigmund Freud, pointed out that people who have similar experiences during the day, and who
are then subjected (10) .............. the same stimuli when they are asleep, produce different dreams.
Freud (11) ou. on to develop a theory of the dream process which (12) .........0... enable him
to interpret dreams as clues to the conflicts taking place within the personality. It is by no
(13) wo an exaggeration to say that (14) ow. any other theories have had (15) .............
great an influence on subsequent thought.

16

Paper 3 Use of English

Part 2

For questions 16-25, read the text below. Use the word given in capitals at the end of some of
the lines to form a word that fits in the space in the same line. There is an example at the
beginning (0).

Write your answers in CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet.

example: [0 |/E|C]O]N]O|M]1 jC

Food miles

In Britain, what is described as ‘food miles’, the distance which food is
transported from the place where it is grown to its point of sale, continues to

rise. This has major (0) .2¢9M9MI¢, , social and environmental consequences, ECONOMY
given the traffic congestion and pollution which (16) ............... follow. VARIABLE
According to (17) ............... groups, the same amount of food is travelling PRESS

50 per cent further than twenty years ago. What’s more, the rise in the
demand for road haulage over this period has mostly been due to the trans-
port of food and drink. The groups assert that the increase in the number

of lorry journeys is (18) ow. and that many of these are far from EXCEED
(19) we . ESSENCE
In the distribution systems employed by British food (20) ............. , fleets of RETAIL

lorries bring all goods into more (21) . located warehouses for CENTRE

redistribution across the country. (22) .... .. as this might appear, the LOGIC
situation whereby some goods get sent back to the same areas from which

they came is (23) uu... . AVOID

In response to scathing (24) ....... from environmentalists, some food CRITIC
distributors now aim to minimise the impact of food miles by routing vehicles,

wherever possible, on motorways after dark. This encourages greater energy

(25) oe whilst also reducing the impact on the residential areas through EFFICIENT
which they would otherwise pass.

17



=== Page 13 ===

Test 1
Part 3 29
For questions 26-31, think of one word only which can be used appropriately in all three sentences.
Here is an example (0).
Example:
0 Some of the tourists are hoping to get compensation for the poor state of the hotel, and | think
They NAVE A VETY oe cee teeteeeeneene case.
There’s no point in trying to wade across the river, the Current iS faf 100 oo eects + 30
If you’re asking me which of the candidates should get the job, I’m afraid | don’t have any
sesesees suena Views either way.
DeeeonG TH
Write only the missing word in CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet.
3i

26 if it’s only a wees of a few pence, it hardly seems worth asking for your

money back.
I'd like to have a word with you sometime, about a PErSONAl oo. :

Household rubbish, including paper, glass, plastic ANd OFgaMNiC oe seeeeeeee tees ;
be sorted into separate categories.

27 The local buses charge a ... ... fare of 70p to the town centre.

Jeff's demand for a meeting with management was Met WIEN A vo. esesseesenees refusal.
My car battery’s completely 0.0.0.0. ene , because | must have left the lights on all
night.

28 Suspicion immediately oo. eee on the last person to see the woman before her
disappearance.
Their relationship just 00.00 to pieces after they'd only been together for a few
months.
As more jobs became available in the improving economic situation, the rate of unemployment

deen ShAMpPly.
18

Paper 3 Use of English

Eve set out, armed with a stout stick, t0 0... a path through clumps of bushes
and enormous ferns.

THE MIAdAY SUN oo... essen Gown mercilessly on the withered crops in the dried-up
fields.
USE eee cecteceeccteneeneseeetenees the egg white until it’s frothy, and fold it into the mixture.

The salesman oe
previous owner.

sso the customer to believe that the car had had only one

A narrow path through the W00d oo. eeeeenene all the way to the back of the hotel.

The former soldier found civilian life boring as he had ..... ee e sees such an exciting
life in the army.

To call for assistance, .... ... the bell at the reception desk.

The reporters began to
reasons for his resignation.

the politician for more information about the

The police finally confirmed that they intended to
women.

..., charges against both

19



=== Page 14 ===

Test 1

Part 4

For questions 32~39, complete the second sentence so that it has a similar meaning io the first
sentence, using the word given. De not change the word given. You must use between three
and eight words, including the word given.

Here is an example (0).

Example:

6 Do you mind if | watch you while you paint?

objection

Write only the missing words on the separate answer sheet.

32

33

34

20

The present government has never promised to lower taxation.
time

AL coccccccsccsssssssccneveneeeseeneuesecesecseassesesneaceesesecaeareetsavavensareneessesessansaseees promised to lower taxation.

Helen’s report is rather unclear in places.
lacking

Helen’s r@POrt occ essestesessseesessesteesseenesseseeseessssesmsssssenessaesseesssensensseeseenes in places.

William tried to remain impartial in the quarrel between his two cousins.
sides

WHAM tC eee eececeeeneeeeneeceseeneeneenescsusseeecsesseressseseanseneseenenseetesees in the quarrel
between his two cousins.

35

36

37

38

39

Paper 3 Use of English

Andrew is the most generous person | have ever mei.
more

PVE JOE cece rseesenseeeeeseeeenssserstcesssseserseseeneesessesscesasesereetesssseseaeaneneesan Andrew.

Jason didn’t hesitate for a moment before he accepted the offer.
slightest

JASON CINE ooo cccccsececeeseenesneereceenecesseseaneseeatenssneseeecsesesesesstsussesesnersesenesasens accepting the offer.

| never thought that | would win a prize.
crossed

Thee ceceeeeseeeeseeesneseneecesessesesnssessteuesessesssenssnssssnseneseseseseteesereeaenes that | would win a prize.

| don’t understand the reason for Liz’s sudden departure yesterday.
why

[don’t UNdErStand occ eesesesessesscseesssesesessssssssecsresssseecssssenstssssesseenssneneas yesterday.

Having explained things three times, Simon’s patience was exhausted.

run

Having explained things three times, Simon ..
patience.



=== Page 15 ===

Test 1

Part 5

For questions 40-44, read the following texts on business practice. For questions 40-43, answer
with a word or short phrase. You do not need to write complete sentences. For question 44, write
a summary according to the instructions given.

Write your answers to questions 40-44 on the separate answer sheet.

40

22

Business is becoming more and more a matter of intellectual prowess. Business
success is based ever more directly and speedily on the abilities of the people in the
business world to change, foresee trends, take acceptable risks, be more in tune with
tomorrow’s needs of today’s customers and to set their stalls out for the myriad
economic and social changes that are occurring. To seize advantage in these ways is
not a matter of brute force, but one of finely honed intelligence, coupled with
genuine qualities of character and a continuous dedication to staying ahead in the
race. Just as athletics demonstrates continuously that not only does an athlete have
to be in good shape but also in the right frame of mind to win, so it is with business.
The difficulty is that, while few will contradict these statements, few also follow the
logic of their beliefs through to a coherent and consistent philosophy which imbues
their company from top to bottom. Nor will you find these issues the subject of
endless board debate and introspection. Even companies which have a clearly
expressed and understood company style, to which they attribute their company
advantage, have come across it more by accident than by planning. Some companies
are proud of their restless style of management, which is never satisfied with its
achievements, but this characteristic derives as much from the character of the chief
executive as from deep philosophical debate.

Why is the use of the phrase ‘set their stalls out’ (line 4) particularly appropriate in this
context?

line 4

42

43

44

Paper 3 Use of English

Successful ambitious companies with clear visions need successful ambitious people
who can ‘live the vision’ for both business and themselves and who see that the two
go hand in hand. Successful operations result not from working harder but from
working more effectively, which in turn is the result not of individual efforts, but of
the system in which the individuals work. Group success won by raising the
performance of the system automatically increases the success of group members.

The analogy with a sports team is self-evident. Buying an expensive star won’t make
a bad football team good, but a good side, with a shared vision of excellent perfor-
mance and how to achieve it, turns mediocre players into star performers. The
importance of group vision doesn’t diminish the individual role but enhances it. A
system in which individuals can correct defects and suggest improvements, including
the vision and its fulfilment, will have higher performance and more satisfied, better-
motivated people, than one in which they are confined to obeying orders from on
high.

The philosophy hinges on releasing the initiative and ability of companies, teams and
individuals to perform better, and to go on raising their game — in short, to make
progress, a word conveying the essence of true success and the power of true vision.
Not everyone can come first, but anyone can advance closer to important goals, and
having reached them can pitch their vision higher still. For companies, teams and
individuals, success is never total, for progress can always be made.

line 2

line 13
line 14

Explain in your own words what the writer means when he says that successful companies

need people who can ‘live the vision’ (line 2).

Why might ‘obeying orders from on high’ (lines 13-14) be detrimental to the development of

a business?

In a paragraph of between 50 and 70 words, summarise in your own words as far as
possible the comparisons made by the writers between success in business and success

in sport. Write your summary on the separate answer sheet.

23



=== Page 16 ===

Test 1
PAPER 4 LISTENING (40 minutes approximately)

Part 1

You will hear four different extracts. For questions 1-8, choose the answer (A, B or C) which fits

best according to what you hear. There are two questions for each extract.

You hear part of a radio interview with Tom Webster, an actor whose latest film has just been

released.

1 in Tom’s opinion, what may be the reason for an actor's refusal to give an interview?

A. the actor's dissatisfaction with their performance
B_ the tendency of journalists to ask embarrassing questions
C the audience’s failure to show interest in the actor’s current film

2 What is Tom’s attitude towards today’s interview?

A He is appreciative of the chance to discuss film-making.
B He wants to focus on the film he has made.
€ He knows the publicity will help his film career.

You hear a psychologist talking about ways of measuring personality.

3 What does the speaker say about the way we describe people’s personality?

A It demands a large vocabulary.
Bt may involve personal feelings.
€ It can lead to misunderstandings.

4 The speaker refers to ‘extroversion’ and ‘introversion’ to illustrate changes in

A how the words are defined.
B how personality is analysed.
C_ the way people behave.

24

eee

Fy

Paper 4 Listening

You hear a journalist, who travels for his work, talking about what home means to him.

§ How did the speaker feel when he was growing up in Scotland?

A lost
B aione
Cc trapped

6 What motivated the speaker to try to return to Scotland in later life?

A a romantic longing for security
Ba desire to leave London
C€ asudden impulse to relive memories

You hear part of a radio interview with the author of a new book about the USA.

7 The author had previously decided against writing a book on the USA because

A he thought the subject was too broad.
B he had not travelled extensively in the country.
Che knew the project would require a lot of concentration.

8 The author's book consists of material which

A represents about half his output on the topic.
B_ was originally published elsewhere.
€ presents a unified view of the USA.

25


=== Page 17 ===

Test 1

Part 2

You will hear part of a radio programme about ice-skating rinks. For questions 9-17, complete the
sentences with a word or short phrase.

ice-skating was originally used as a way of

around northern European waterways.

The first indoor rinks were popular because they offered skaters a

| from the cold.

The spread of indoor rinks was limited by the cost of the piping, made of

in the second half of the twentieth century,

was added as an event to the Winter Olympics.

The technology used to make the ice for indoor ice rinks is similar to that used in domestic

| and refrigeration.

The waiter for the first two very thin layers of ice is pumped through a

Sponsors of hockey tears may have their

15 painted on the ice.
fie to apply.

The top layer of ice can take up to

The wrong environmental conditions in the building can produce a layer of

above the surface of the ice.

26

ee

Paper 4 Listening

Part 3

You will hear the beginning of a radio interview with Stephen Perrins, a composer of musicals. For
questions 18-22, choose the answer (A, B, C or D) which fits best according to what you hear.

18 The light songs Stephen wrote at college weren’t published because

A he couldn’t interest a publisher in them.

B he was afraid of people’s reactions. 18
C his family advised him against it. fe
D

he didn’t think they would sell.

19. Stephen and Jenny’s original reason for writing Goidringer was that

they wanted to include it in their college show.

it was commissioned for a school concert.

they wanted to find out if they were able to do so.
a music publisher asked them to write a musical.

GOD.}P

20 Stephen prefers not to write the lyrics for his shows because he

would rather work with someone else.
finds it difficult to write them.

thinks they are of poor quality.

is only interested in writing music.

0OW PR

21 Stephen's purpose in mentioning Helen Downes is to convince listeners that

he has strong views about productions of his musicals.
Helen Downes was an unsuitable director.

the design for a particular show was of too low a standard.
the director has ultimate responsibility for a production.

UO b

22 Stephen claims that the reason why some newspapers criticise him is that

they think he is conceited.

they don’t like his music.

he isn’t interested in publicity.

he tries to control his public image.

OO Gb

27



=== Page 18 ===

Test 1

Part 4

You will hear part of a radio arts programme, in which two people, Arthur and Carla, are discussing
a book called Windworld. For questions 23-28, decide whether the opinions are expressed by only
one of the speakers, or whether the speakers agree.

Write A for Arthur,
C for Carla,
or B_ for Both, where they agree.

23 The portrayal of key individuals in the story is confidently handled.

24 The historical information fits the period in which the novel is set.

25 The inclusion of too many scientific facts undermines the story.

26 Windworld is aimed at a different audience to that of Swallow's other books. 26 |

27 The story benefits from the inclusion of autoblographical elements.

jeagae
28 A film version of this novel should only focus on personal elemenis. 28 |

28

Paper S Speaking

PAPER5 SPEAKING (19 minutes)

There are two examiners. One (the interlocutor) conducts the test, providing you with the necessary
materials and explaining what you have to do. The other examiner (the Assessor) will be introduced
to you, but then takes no further part in the interaction.

Part 1 (8 minutes)

The Interlocutor first asks you and your partner a few questions which focus on information about
yourselves and personal opinions.

Part 2 (4 minutes)

In this part of the test you and your partner are asked to talk together. The Interlocutor places a
set of pictures on the table in front of you. This stimulus provides the basis for a discussion. The
Interlocutor first asks an introductory question which focuses on one or two of the pictures. After
about a minute, the Interlocutor gives you both a decision-making task based on the same set of
pictures.

The pictures for Part 2 are on pages C2-C3 of the colour section.

Part 3 (12 minutes)

You are each given the opportunity to talk for two minutes, to comment after your partner has
spoken and to take part in a more general discussion.

The Interlocutor gives you a card with a question written on it and asks you to talk about it for
two minutes. After you have spoken, your partner is first asked to comment and then the
Interlocutor asks you both another question related to the topic on the card. This procedure is
repeated, so that your partner receives a card and speaks for two minutes, you are given an
opportunity to comment and a follow-up question is asked.

Finally, the interlocutor asks some further questions, which leads to a discussion on a general
theme related to the subjects already covered in Part 3.

The cards for Part 3 are on pages C10-—C11 of the colour section.

29



=== Page 19 ===

Test 2

PAPER 1 READING (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1

For questions 1-18, read the three texts below and decide which answer (A, B, € or D) best fits
each gap.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

Sand

Much as | admire sand’s miraculous ability to be transformed into useful objects like glass and
concrete, | am not a great fan of it in its (1) .... state. To me it is primarily a hostile barrier that stands
between a seaside car park and the waiter itself. it blows in your face, (2)-.... in your sandwiches,
and swailows vital objects like car keys and coins. When you are wet it (3) .... to you like ‘stucco’,
and cannot be (4) .... , even with a fireman’s hose. But, and here’s the strange thing, the moment
you step onto a beach towel, climb into a car or walk across a recently vacuumed carpet, it pours
off you. For days afterwards, you tip mysteriously undiminishing piles of it onto the floor every time
you take off your shoes, and spray the vicinity with lots more when you (5) .... your socks. Sand
stays with you for longer than many contagious diseases. No, you can (6) .... sand, as far as | am
concerned.

1 A_ normal B natural C unrefined D unmixed
2 A enters B seeps € gets D comes

3 A adheres B attracts C fixes B grips

4 A shorn B scraped ¢ shoved Ds shifted

5 A peel off Broil away Cc move off D strip away
6 A have B keep Cc hold D store

Lock and Key

The search for a safe home, for privacy and security, has existed ever since human beings first
built a permanent homestead. The rope-lifted beam behind the door may have (7) .... to an
electronic lock triggered by a plastic card with more combinations than there are atoms in the

30

Paper1 Reading

universe, but the (8) .... to shut out the ‘bad guys’ remains. The appeal of a lock and key is, to
some (9) .... , psychological. Recently, various companies have experimented with computerised
locking systems, where smart cards, swiped through a ‘reader’, control electronic locks by means
of a digital (10) ..... But people don’t like them. You may be (11) .... to put up with it at work, but at
home, everyone wants the (12) .... of turning a physical key in a lock. As a result, when one
locksmith company developed a new electronic system, they made sure they incorporated a proper
metal key into the device.

7 A takenon B given way € handed down D passed over
8 A force B craving C shove D urge

9 A _— extent B rate ¢ measure BD scale

10 A directive B command Cc rule D manipulation
11 A agreeabie B liable C prepared B geared

12 A reassurance B guarantee ¢ endorsement D confirmation

Modern Art

| was nervous about visiting the new Tate Modern gallery as, like many people, | can make head
nor (13) .... of modern art. | know | quite like some of it, furry things in particular, neon light
sculptures and massive photographs. Perhaps if | were better informed about it, i'd have an opinion
on more things. There again, you’re not meant to (14) .... about it in a school-essay way. The point
is not to grasp art, but to let it communicate with you. This is a splendid idea but one that never
worked for me in (15) ..... But this new gallery has tried to give the visitor a genuine insight into
the whys and wherefores of the works. The first thing | noticed were the labels, proper labels that
set a work in (16) .... and actually told you what it was trying to say. Instead of staring (17) .... at
the pictures as | used to, these (18) .... of information helped me understand.

13 A_ foot B tail ¢C heart D heel
14 A set B look Cs start D put

15 A honesty B purpose C practice D action
16 A context B place Cc conirast D situation
17 A barely B clearly €  blankiy D plainly
18 A nuggets B abstracts C extracts D cuttings

31



=== Page 20 ===

Test 2

Part 2

You are going to read four extracts which are all concerned in some way with group dynamics.
For questions 19-26, choose the answer (A, B, € or D) which you think fits best according to

the texi.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

Observing Lions

In the popular imagination, lions hunting for food present a marvel of group
choreography: in the dying light of sunset, a band of stealthy cats springs forth from
the shadows like trained assassins and surrounds its unsuspecting prey. The lions
seem to be archetypal social animals, rising above petty dissension to work together
towards a common goal — in this case, their next meal. But after spending many years
observing these creatures in the wild, we have acquired a less exalted view.

When we started our research in 1978, we hoped to discover why lions teamed up
to hunt, rear cubs and among other things, scare off rivals with chorused roars. If
the ultimate success of an animal’s behaviour is measured by its lifetime production
of surviving offspring, then cooperation does not necessarily pay: if an animal is too
generous, its companions benefit at its expense. Why, then, did not the evolutionary
rules of genetic self-interest seem to apply to lions?

We confidently assumed that we would be able to resolve that issue in two to three
years. But lions are supremely adept at doing nothing. To the list ofinert noble gases,
including krypton, argon and neon, we would add lion. Thus it has taken a variety
of research measures to uncover clucs about the cats’ behaviour. Because wild lions
can live up to 18 years, the answers to our questions are only now becoming clear.

18 In the first paragraph, the writer suggests that the results of his research

may not confirm commonly-held opinions.

may contradict findings in other studies.

will require some unpleasant descriptive writing.
will have implications for other social groups.

oO PY

line 7
line 8
line 9
line 10
line 14
line 12

20 The writer illustrates what he means by ‘evolutionary rules’ (lines 11-12) when he refers to

&

the fact that ‘lions teamed up to hunt’. (lines 7-8)

B ‘the ultimate success of an animal’s behaviour’. (line 9)

€ the ‘lifetime production of surviving offspring’. (lines 9-10)

BD the fact that ‘cooperation does not necessarily pay’. (line 10)

32

21

22

Paper 1

Pop Music Review

The release of Bedrock’s third album was more than just a landmark in the career of
a talented but hitherto precarious band. New Life iaunched a movement that effectively
redesigned the specification of rock music in this country for the rest of the decade.
Out went the earnest angst, plain-shirted drabness and overdriven guitars of a
previous era; in came a lighter blend of melodious homegrown styles. A mix of social
observation and strident anger mingled easily here with the sound of fairground
organs and northern brass bands. Humour and irony were well to the fore, as were
the voices that felt no need to disguise their origins.

The album showed Bedrock to be skilful magpie collectors and observers, and a
cunningly versatile team of songwriters. At their most obvious, they went larkily after
traditional English preoccupations such as sunbathing and Sunday afternoons. But the
album’s real strength lay in the gentle melancholy depths it plurnbed on tracks such
as ‘So Low’, a gorgeous unfurling tune loosely hung around the theme of meteorology,
and ‘To the Brink’, a ballad that allowed no smirking at the back. The beauty of New
Life is its consistently sky-high quality — 16 tracks with absolutely no filler remains an
unsurpassed record in the era of loiteringly long CDs.

In the writers view, what was Bedrock’s musical status prior to the release of New Life?

They had been overlooked by music experts.

Their music did not fit with any particular genre.

Their foothold in the music world had been uncertain.

They had been unable to successfully mix style and image.

oO.

The writer suggests that New Life outshines other albums of its time because

the collection of songs successfully combines wit and sentiment.
the lyrics portray situations that are known to its listeners.

all the band mernbers contributed to its construction.

every track that it features is worth listening to.

OO OW

Reading

33



=== Page 21 ===

Test 2

Extract from an autobiography

23

24

34

As a child I was always fascinated by stories of ‘The Sibyl’, those mysteriously wise
women who wielded such influence in the ancient world. To begin with, I only knew of
the existence of one who appeared in a tale my mother had told me. An old woman of
Cumae offered Tarquin, King of Rome, nine books for 300 gold pieces. He refused and
she burnt three of them, offering him six for the same price. When he refused, she again
burnt three books. He bought the remaining three for the full 300 goid pieces.

I realised even then that there was a profound truth hidden in the story — a lesson in
salesmanship and in life. I was sometimes a lonely only child. I used to ask to play with
other children and be refused. My mother told me to do something so interesting that all
the other kids would beg to join me. It worked. It was another lesson that Pve never
forgotten.

When I was given the chance to write a travel book, I had to look for something that I
could bear to find out about, something that was relevant to my life. I'm a reluctant
traveller — at the first opportunity I sent my editor a very long list of places I wasn’t
prepared to go to. When it comes down to it, I’m only interested in ruins, because the travel
I like is the travel of the mind through time.

What impressed the writer about the story of the old woman?

A It provided her with a model of behaviour.
Bit underpinned her moral standpoint.

€ it illustrated a common misconception.
Dit gave her a salutary warning.

What was the writer’s attitude towards writing a travel book?

She was worried about the time commitment involved.
She was unwilling to go to certain places unprepared.
She challenged her editor’s initial suggestions.
She insisted on following her own inclinations.

oO 8 Pp

a a a a en ate i torre rele UN TT jem ier ahaa

25

26

Paper 1 Reading

What becomes of your manuscript?

When you submit your manuscript it will most likely join a heap waiting for
someone to sort and sift before it topples over — the so-called slush pile. The
someone is usually either the editorial department junior (i.e. under 18) or an
old hand who comes in a couple of mornings a week and is paid by the hour.
Neither of these has much influence, but they are basically on your side and out
to discover something original — the junior to make his or her name and acquire
an author of their own if they are lucky, the old hand to justify continuing
freelance employment.

If they think your novel is promising, they will pass it on to a more senior editor

and eventually it will surface at an acquisition meeting. The championing editor
will not only have to justify accepting your novel on the grounds of intrinsic
merit and potential sales, but also say whether you as an author seem to be a
long-term prospect (which you will have assured them of in your letter). Also
the question is raised of how promotable you are likely to be — an important

factor in an age when a new novel needs all the help it can get. To this end,

line 15

publishers often like to meet a potential author before clinching the offer.

What encouraging information does the writer offer to authors who submit manuscripts to

publishers?

A Manuscripts are often dealt with quickly.

B_ The staff are keen to identify a new author.
C A well-written novel will definitely be noticed.
DB The initial selection process is very thorough.

What does the phrase ‘To this end’ (line 15) refer to?

oO 8 P

assessing an author's publicity value
predicting a novel’s commercial success
judging the appearance of a novel
evaluating an author's loyalty to a publisher

35



=== Page 22 ===

Test 2

Part 3

You are going to read a newspaper article about sleep. Seven paragraphs have been removed
from the article. Choose from the paragraphs A-H the one which fits each gap (27-33). There is
one extra paragraph which you do not need to use.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

Enough Sleep?

Tiredness, it is often claimed, has become the
modern condition. As the richer, busier
countries have grown, so sleeplessness and
anxiety have also grown in the popular psyche.
Research in the USA has found 40 million
Americans to be chronically affected, and some
recent best-selling novels in Britain have
featured insomniacs as protagonists, or sleep-
research laboratories as their settings.

miaa |
| ar

trying not to. At first the person at the wheel is
very upright, wet and bleary eyes determinedly
fixed on the windscreen. Then he begins to
blink briefly, every now and again; then
for longer, and more often, with a slight drop
of the head. Each nod grows heavier than
the last. The blinks become a 10-second
blackout. Every time, he jerks awake as if
nothing has happened. But the car, by the
second or third occasion, has shot off the
carriageway.

Recently, a sleep researcher tried an
experiment. He offered his subjects the opposite
of the modern routine. ‘I allowed them to sleep
for up to 14 hours a night for a month. It took
them three weeks to reach an equilibrium of
eight-and-a-quarter hours. That indicates a
great rebound of sleep — sleep that they hadn't
been getting.’

ia

For guinea pigs, they advertise in the student
newspapers. Subjects are picked up by taxi,
paid £5 an hour, and asked to adjust their
sleeping patterns according to instructions.
Dr Louise Reyner provides reassurance:
‘Some people are quite worried, because
you’re putting electrodes on their heads, and
they think you can see what they're dreaming or
thinking.’

[x

ee

The young men all deny they are going to fall
asleep. Dr Reyner has a video recording of one

36

But apart from these findings, what else do we
know about human sleep with any kind of
certainty? It is known that humans sleep, like
other mammals, according to a daily cycle.
Once asleep, they switch between four different
stages of unconsciousness, from stage one
sleep, the shallowest, to stage four, the deepest.
When dreams occur, which is usually during the
lightest sleep, the brain paralyses the body
except for the hands and eyelids, thus
preventing injuries.

However, there is a strong degree of certainty
among scientists that women sleep for half
an hour longer than men, and that older
people require less sleep, though they don’t
know why. When asked what sleep is for,
some sleep researchers reply in cosmic terms:
‘Sleep is a tactic to travel through time without

injury.’

[3 ae
3 i.

The interlude was a haven for reflection,
remembering dreams, or even night-time
thieving. The poorest were the greates
beneficiaries of this quiet time, fleetingly freed
from the constraints and labours that ruled their
day-time existence.

30

fon

Paper 1 Reading

Yet beyond Europe and America, the oid pattern
was widespread until quite recently, and
according to a leading anthropologist, in some
non-western settings there are still no rigid
bedtimes. People go to bed for a few hours, and
then get up again. The idea of a night’s solid sleep
does not apply. For certain tribal societies, human
and animal noises and the need to supervise the
fire and watch out for predators combine to make
continuous sleep impossible. It seems that people
all round the worid are badly in need of sieep.

A Beyond this, certainties blur into theories. |
is often suggested, for example, that sleep
repairs body tissue, or restores muscles, or
rests the frontal section of the brain tha’
controls speech and creativity. But all of this
may happen more quickly during relaxed
wakefulness, so no one is really sure.

B Part of this interest is in sleep in general: in
its rhythms, its uses and in problems with
sleeping. But a central preoccupation
remains. ‘People need more sleep,’ says one
leading sleep researcher. ‘People cut back
on sleep when they're busy. They get up too
early to avoid the rush hour.’

C By the 17th century, however, as artificial
ight became more common, the rich began
to switch to the more concentrated, and
economically more efficient, mode of re-
cuperation that we follow today. Two cen-
turies later, the industrial revolution pushed
back the dusk for everyone except some
country-dwellers, by making most people
work longer hours in lighted buildings.

D The sleep researchers seem interested in
this theory. But the laboratory is not funded
to investigate such matters. Its sponsors
want its research to lead to practical
solutions such as deciding where Take a
Break signs should be placed on motorways,
and how different kinds of food and drink can
affect driving and sleepiness.

E A coffee might have heiped. Two cups,
Dr Reyner says, even after no sleep ai all,

can make you a safe driver for half an hour or
more. She recommends a whole basket of
alertness products: tablets, energy drinks,
caffeinated chewing gum. Shift workers, she is
quite sure, could probably use them.

F Moreover, people may have had different
sleep patterns in the past. A history professor
has investigated nocturnal British — life
between 1500 and 1850 and discovered that
sleeping routines were very different. People
went to bed at nine or ten, then woke up after
midnight, after what they called their ‘first
sleep’, stayed awake for an hour, and then
had their ‘morning sleep’.

G In fact, the laboratory’s interest is more
physical. In a darkened room stands a
motorway simulator, the front section of a car
facing a wide projection screen. The subjects
are always told to arrive at 2pm, in the body’s
natural mid-afternoon lull, after a short night’s
sleep or no sleep at all. The projector is
switched on and they are asked to drive,
while answering questions. An endless road
rolls ahead, sunlight glares; and the air is
warm.

H In Europe, such propositions are perhaps
most thoroughly tested in a small, unassum-
ing building on a university campus in the
English Miclands. The university sleep
research laboratory has investigated, among
many subjects, the effects of fatigue on
sailors, the effects of airport noise on
sleepers, and the dangers of motorway
driving for flagging drivers. :

37



=== Page 23 ===

Test 2

Part 4

You are going to read an extract from a textbook. For questions 34-40, choose the answer

(A, B, € or DB) which you think fits best according to the text.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

BROADCASTING: The Social Shaping of a Technology

‘Broadcasting’ originally meant sowing seeds broadly, by hand. It is, in other words,
not only an agricultural metaphor, it is also one of optimistic modernism. It is about
planned growth in the widest possible circles, the production, if the conditions are right,
of a rich harvest. The metaphor presupposes a bucket of seeds at the centre of the activity,
ie. the existence of centralised resources intended and suited for spreading - and
reproduction. The question to be looked into is why a new technology that transmitted
words and pictures electronically was organised in a way that made this agricultural
metaphor seem adequate.

Since television as a technology is related to various two-way forms of communication,
such as the telegraph and the telephone, it is all the more striking that, from its very early
days, it was envisaged as a centralised ‘mass’ medium. However, transmission to private
homes from some centralised unit was simply in keeping with both socio-economic
structures and the dominant ways of life in modern and modernising societies. Attempts
or experiments with other forms of organisation in the long run remained just that ~
attempts and experiments. Two little-known, distinct alternatives deserve mentioning since
they highlight what television might have been ~ in a different social context.

Experiments with two-way television as a possible replacement for the ordinary
telephone were followed up, so to speak, by radio amateurs in Britain in the early 1930s.
Various popular science journals, such as Radio News, had detailed articles about how to
construct television transmitters and receivers and, throughout the 1930s, experimenting
amateurs were active in many parts of the country. But Big Business, represented by the
British Radio Manufacturers Association, in 1938 agreed upon standards for television
equipment and channel regulations which drove the grass-roots activists out. And so there
passed, at least in Britain, the historical ‘moment’ for a counter-cultural development of
television as a widely diffused, grass-roots, egalitarian form of communication.

Broadcasting in some form was, however, tied not only to strong economic interests, but
also to the deep structures of modern societies. In spite of the activities of TV amateurs,
television was also primarily a medium for theatrical exhibition in the USA in the early
1930s, and as such often thought to be a potential competitor of the film industry. In fact,
television was throughout the 1930s predominantly watched in public settings also outside
of the USA. For example, in Britain, public viewing of television was the way in which most
early audiences actually experienced the medium and this was even more the case in
Germany. While the vision of grass-roots or amateur, two-way television was quite
obviously doomed to a very marginal position at the very best, television systems largely
based on collective public reception were in fact operating in several countries in the 1930s

38

line 2
line 3
line 4
line 5

Paper1 Reading

and may, with the benefit of hindsight, be seen as having presented more of a threat to the
domestication of the medium. But it was a threat that was not to materialise.

Manufacturers saw the possibilities for mass sales of domestic sets as soon as the price
could be reduced, and given the division and relation between the public and private
domains fundamental to modernity, centralised broadcasting to a dispersed domestic
audience was clearly the most adequate organisation of the medium. As working-class
people achieved improved standards of living and entered ‘consumer’ society from about
the 1920s onwards, the dreams of the home as a fully equipped centre for entertainment
and diverse cultural experiences became realisable for the majority of inhabitants of
Western nation-states. And all of this is now also happening on a global scale.

There is a clear relationship between the basic processes of social modernisation and the
dominant structures of broadcasting. While social and economic modernisation meant
increasing centralisation and concentration of capital and political power, the break-up of
traditional communities produced new ways of life. Mobility was both social and
geographical, and both forms implied that individuals and households were, both literally
and metaphorically, ‘on the move’ in ways that left them relatively isolated compared to
people in much more stable early communities. Centralised broadcasting was both an
answer to the need felt by central government to reach all citizens with important
information efficiently, and a highly useful instrument in the production of the
harmonising, stabilising ‘imagined community’ of the nation-state.

The pervasiveness of these structured processes and interests rendered broadcasting the
‘naturally’ victorious organisation of both radio and television. What is left out here is
the more positive view of broadcasting as a social form suitable also for democracy. In the
formation of broadcasting policies between the World Wars, the interest in broadcasting as
a means of securing equal access to resources necessary for conscious, informed and
autonomous participation in political, social and cultural life played a very important role
in many countries. Of course television is changing, and there is the risk that the very term
broadcasting becomes outmoded or at least inadequate. In which case, this metaphor will
be seen only as referring to a particular organisation of audio-visual technology during a
certain centralised phase of social modernisation.

34 In the metaphor explored by the writer in the first paragraph, what does the ‘bucket of
seeds’ (line 4) represent?

A planned growth (line 3)

Ba trich harvest (line 4)

G the centre of the activity (line 4)
D centralised resources (line 5)

39


=== Page 24 ===

Test 2 : Paper 2 Writing

35 In the second paragraph, what view does the writer express about the way in which . PAPER 2 WRITING (2 hours)
television developed?

It confirmed the results of experiments. Part 1
It reflected other social trends.

It was dominated by other technologies.
it was limited by economic constraints.

oO.

You must answer this question. Write your answer in 300-350 words in an appropriate style.

36 The writer regards the experiments by radio amateurs in the 1930s as

: . os . . 1 You see the following two letters printed in a magazine.
A amissed opportunity to use television technology in a different way.

B investigations into the commercial potential of television technology.
C abreakthrough in the development of new types of television transmitters.
D attempts to establish a more effective means of communication than the telephone.

Inever want to grow old because then you have nothing

to offer society, and other people have to look after you

37 Looking back, what does the writer feel about public viewings of TV in the 1930s? and worry about you.
ADRIAN (18 YEARS OLD)

They received a lot of opposition from the film industry.

They were limited to small audiences outside the USA.

They might have provided an alternative to the way broadcasting developed.

They were less significant than the experiments with two-way television.

GOP

Tlove being the age I am (over 60) because now I am free to

38 Transmission to people’s homes became a dominant feature of television because enjoy life and do all the things I have always wanted to do. I
; , - have learnt a lot about life, and I have a lot to offer other
changes in society had created a demand for this.

it became possible to manufacture televisions on a domestic scale.
television audiences were seen as potential consumers of advertised goods.
it was an effective way of delivering the programme schedules that people wanted.

people. Life is great.
JANE (62 YEARS OLD)

Coo Y

39 In the sixth paragraph, the writer says that the authorities saw broadcasting as a means of oe a ;
The magazine is inviting readers to express their views on the subject of growing old. You

A controlling the information that people received. decide to write a letter to the magazine, responding to the points raised and expressing your
B_ accelerating the process of modernisation. own views.

C boosting their own political influence.

D counteracting social upheaval. Write your letter. Do not write any postal addresses.

40 Inthe final paragraph, what does the writer say he has omitted from his earlier analysis?

A The factors that motivate people in the broadcasting industry.
B The resources needed to operate a broadcasting service.

C The capacity of broadcasting to empower people.

D_ The strength of the interests behind broadcasting.



=== Page 25 ===

Test 2

Part 2

Write an answer to one of the questions 2-6 in this part. Write your answer in 300-350 words in
an appropriate siyle.

2 You read the following in an international magazine:

Poverty exists in almost every country, and the difference between the rich
and the poor is growing all the time. What can we do about this situation?

The magazine has asked people to send in ideas in the form of a proposal, suggesting ways of
helping to reduce poverty. You decide to send in a proposal.

Write your proposal.

3 The local council has conducted a survey to find out if local residents think that public money
should be spent on a new leisure centre, a new library or a new playground for children. You
have been asked to write a report for the local council based on the opinions the residents gave
in the survey, and make appropriate recommendations.

Write your report.
4 International Traveller magazine is running a competition for the best article entitled ‘A Country
of Contrasts’. You decide to submit an entry. The article should describe the contrasts that make

the country an interesting place to visit, and encourage the readers to explore the country as
widely as possible.

Write your article.

5 Based on your reading of one of these books, write on one of the following.

(a) Anne Tyler: The Accidental Tourist
‘A dried-up kernel of a man that nothing really penetrates.’ Write an essay for your tutor in
which you say how far you agree with this view of Macon.

Write your essay.
(b) John Wyndham: The Day of the Triffids
The editor of a literary magazine is asking for reviews of books which describe events that

changed the world. You write a review of The Day of the Triffids in which you describe the
events and say whether or not the book gives an optimistic view of human nature.

Write your review.

(c) Graham Greene: Our Man in Havana
‘Our Man in Havana was written to amuse and entertain the reader. It has no serious morai
purpose.’ Write an essay for your tutor, saying how far you agree or disagree with this view
of the novel.

Write your essay.

42

Paper2 Writing



=== Page 26 ===

Test 2

PAPER 3 USE OF ENGLISH (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1

For questions 1-15, read the text below and think of the word which best fits each space. Use only
one word in each space. There is an example at the beginning (0).

Write your answers in CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet.

Example: |0|/O|/R|D/EVR LL |

Logical thinking

words, the hearer needs to know what observations would lead him or her, (8) 0.0.0... certain
conditions be met, to accept the proposition as true, or reject it as false. Following on (6) ...........
this, if the proposition is of (7) ou... a character that the assumption of its truth is consistent
(B) wee any assumption whatsoever about the nature of the hearer’s future rather than past

experience, then it is certainly (9) «00... a factually verifiable proposition.

With (10) to questions, the procedure is the same. We have to inquire, in each case, what
observations would lead to a definitive answer, and if (14) 0... at all can be discovered, we
must conclude that the sentence does not, as (12)... as we are concerned, express a
genuine question, (13) .
does. Lengthy (15) ...

strongly its grammatical appearance (14) .....0.0.... suggest that it

... this procedure can be, it is an essential element of logical thinking.

44

Paper 3 Use of English

Pari 2

For questions 16-25, read the text below. Use the word given in capitals at the end of some
of the lines to form a word that fits in the space in the same line. There is an example at the

beginning (6).

Write your answers in CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet.

example: [0]/G)R[A[CJETFIU[-] |_| LU

The spiral and the helix

They are everywhere, (0) graceful, curving shapes whose incredible

(16) we. contrasts so sharply with the random world around them. We call
them spirals and helices but that hardly does (17) .......0.... to their diversity or
their significance. Over the centuries, (78) ............... have identified many

occur in the

different types, but the most intriguing are those that (19) ..

natural world.

The need to (20) ... the mysteries of the existence of spirals and helices
has exercised some of the best scientific brains in the world and opened the
way to a number of (21) uu... in fields as widely varied as genetics and
(22) wee :

The most (23) wo. spirals on earth are also the most unwelcome —
hurricanes. Their (24) ............... power comes from the sun’s heat, but they owe

their shape to the force caused by the rotation of the earth. After innumerable
years of study, however, Nature’s spirals and helices have yet to (25) «0.0...
all their secrets. For example, why, astronomers wonder, are so many galaxies

spiral-shaped?

GRACE
REGULAR
JUST
MATHEMATICS
REPEAT

RAVEL

BREAK
METEOR

SPECTACLE
AWE

CLOSE

45


=== Page 27 ===

Test 2

Pari 3

For questions 26-31, think of one word only which can be used appropriately in all three sentences.

Here is an example (0).

Example:

0 Some of the tourists are hoping to get compensation for the poor state of the hotel, and | think

they NAVE @ VELY oo eeeeneecsteesesneess case.

There’s no point in trying to wade across the river, the current iS fAF £00 oo... ecccssssecsssssesssssseeeens .

If you’re asking me which of the candidates should get the job, I'm afraid | don’t have any

... Views either way.

olls|tlefolN[e [ |

Write only the missing word in CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet.

26 This jacket’s @ Dit cesses in the sleeves; | think you should try another one.

Try to avoid annoying Richard, because he’s got a V@ry ....secscsscsssseeecsseeeceeee

temper.
Lucy Wa rather on eeeeesneeeesseees of breath after climbing the 350 steps to the top of the
tower.

27 The texture of this fabric is quite oe tO the touch.
Many passengers were ill, since the sea was quite ....ccseescsseeeeeene during the crossing.
The architect produced @ oo. cccsesccsescsseeessseee skeich of his plans for the new houses.

28 With this new householder’s policy, We Fe wo... cccsesesccscseesseseeees against fire and theft.
The stone carving they found in the jungle WaS ow. eccsescssseseceneeees by a thick layer of mud.

On the first day after ieaving camp, the explorers

46

only ten kilometres.

Paper 3 Use of English

AS S00n aS the DOat oceans the shore, Ben leapt quickly out and hauled it up.

.. by her parents’

When Sally opened her present she was very ...
generosity.

When Jim accidentally 0. the switch, the alarm went off, much to his
consternation.

Now that Tom has so little time, how does he KEEP we eeceseeeeeneneces of all his
investments?

Although thé ....ccnece they found through the wood was narrow, it turned out to

be easy to follow.

The station is no loriger used and the railway oe ceeeeeeeeees has become overgrown
with weeds.

Loon 00) at: ee of whether we want to go on holiday, but whether we can
afford it.

Amy’s loyalty is not in oo. eeeeee , since we have complete faith in her.

Apart from the ODVIOUS oo. eeeeeereeeeneee of space, do you think the ciub reaily needs

new premises?

47



=== Page 28 ===

Test 2

Part 4

For questions 3239, complete the second sentence so that it has a similar meaning to the first
sentence, using the word given. Do not change the word given. You must use between three

and eight words, including the word given.

Here is an example (0).

Example:

© Do you mind if | watch you while you paint?

objection

.. you while you paint?
=a

Write only the missing words on the separate answer sheet.

32 | really enjoy reading, but sometimes | feel like doing something more active.
times

MUCH oo. ccccceesessesesseesesecscesesuesessssusseeeseacsussseesaeesneesesecaneseeneaeeesenee | prefer to do something
more active.

33 The president only made his formal announcement after the publication of the leaked
information.

did

Not until the leaked information oo... cececcssessesscessessesesssssecsssssessecsecsassnsssessecsecseesesssecsecseseeesecsee

his formal announcement.

34 Without your support, I’d never have been able to find a new job.
still

Tf it PAINE occ ee ceesecsenesneessvessesssecsuesnessuessuessesesseesssesueasecensecneecsnseneeeneees doing my old job.

48

Paper 3 Use of English

The villagers said they opposed the plans for the new shopping centre.

disapprovai

THE VINAGELS oo. tesescseeseeneescetecceseseescetenesesseeeseecsnsueanssesessessssesneresseaneneeees the plans for the new
shopping centre.

| wasn’t at all surprised when | heard that Sophie had been promoted.

hear

It CAME vee ceceesresecceseeseeesssseseessesessesstssesteaeseneresneneseteee .. Sophie’s promotion.

i think it would be best if you didn’t mention John’s behaviour to his mother.
say

TP don’t think YOU wo. esse eseseseeeseesesseseesseneseesesesnssssnssesesssssssesessessneeteneeeesenees John’s behaviour
to his mother.

| have no idea whatsoever why Zoe resigned from her job.
loss

1AM ennui Why Zoe resigned from her
job.

The Prime Minister resigned because of his sudden illness.

resulted

The Prime 00.0... cece cree ener se eeeeeeeeeeeaeennenees his sudden illness.

49



=== Page 29 ===

Test 2

For questions 40-44, read the following texts on waiking in the countryside. For questions 40-43,
answer with a word or short phrase. You do not need to write complete sentences. For question

Part 5

44, write a summary according to the instructions given.

Write your answers to questions 40-44 on the separate answer sheet.

In April I dig out my walking boots. My wife’s heart sinks, and a look of cold fury
clouds her lovely features. My children laugh scornfully and call me ‘so sad’ — the
two most critical words in the teenage lexicon.

Find those boots I must. Other men smoke like chimneys or follow football teams
to Brazil and back. My hopeless addiction is taking long walks. 1 am, in short, an
incurable rambler.

The boots have been hibernating in a cupboard since October, like a couple of
curiously-shaped muddy tortoises. Oddly, my rambling compulsion is totally
resistible in winter. I know of masochists who stride doggedly over mountainsides
while January gales lash their waterproofs and turn their ears blue. For me, the
sun must have made some slight attempt to rise above the horizon before I feel a
stirring to strike out for the distant countryside.

When I do ramble, boy, do I go on and on! Not for me the gentle stroll around
some local country park. it must be some inordinately long, exhausting challenge
in the untouched wilderness. It is easy to get depressed about how much of the
country is disappearing under concrete and tarmac. I cannot underestimate the
damage being done by the relentless march of housebuilders, but ramblers know,
even in this overcrowded country, there are extensive tracts where you wander for
hours without seeing another soui, gulping in the exhilarating fresh air, just to
see what is beyond the next ridge.

40 Explain in your own words the reaction of the writer’s family to his hobby.

41

50

Why does the writer describe the ‘march of housebuilders’ (line 17) as ‘relentless’?

line 17

42

43

44

Paper 3 Use of English

Researchers have explored the reasons why so many people induige in outdoor leisure
pursuits, such as hiking, in the natural environment. In general, such individuals appear
to have less need for affiliation with others, and a preference for solitude as well as
high levels of autonomy.

It is possible to make some observations about motivation from this. There is the need
for peace and relief of tension facilitated by solitude, and encountering others in the
wilderness reduces satisfaction. Then there is confidence building achieved by trying
out new activities and acquiring new skills, such as skiing and survival techniques. These
can form an important part of an individual’s self-concept and improve self-esteem.
Stimulation can be obtained by a change in scene, and an opportunity to indulge in
risky activities will enhance this, as in the adrenalin rush associated with activities such
as bungee jumping. Finally, the natural environment may provide a spiritual uplift, either
due to the qualities of the scenery or the symbolic connotations of nature as the giver
of life.

Thus, considerable benefits can be gained from outdoor activities, and a range of
facilities should be provided to meet the needs of the users. Nevertheless, user
satisfaction declines greatly when the outdocr environment is overcrowded or
polluted. The necessary facilities must be provided in sufficient quantity as well as
quality.

What does the writer suggest about the personality of hikers?

line 18
line 19

Explain in your own words why leisure facilities need to be ‘provided in sufficient quantity as

well as quality’. (lines 18-19)

In a paragraph of 50-70 words, summarise in your own words as far as possible what,
according to the writers of the texts, makes people want to explore the countryside. Write your

summary on the separate answer sheet.

51



=== Page 30 ===

Test 2
PAPER 4 LISTENING (40 minutes approximately)

Part 1

You will hear four different extracts. For questions 1-8, choose the answer (A,-B or C) which fits
best according to what you hear. There are two questions for each extract.

You hear part of an interview with Nigel Johnson, a writer who has also written and directed
films.

1 What was the Irish literary community's reaction to Nigel making a film?

A They were jealous of his success.
B They thought film-making was beneath him.
C They were unhappy at how the film would affect Ireland’s image.

2 How does Nigel describe the role of literature in Ireland?

A radical a |
B restrictive Sa

C€ professional

You hear a woman telling a friend about two apologies she has received.

3 The common feature of the two anecdotes is that both people apologised

A_ on behalf of someone else. 5
B because they had made a mistake. ae
C without attempting to justify themselves. =

4 The woman’s anecdotes illustrate that

A apologising can stop other people from feeling angry.
B people feel better after apologising for their errors.
C mistakes seem to be becoming more common these days.

You hear part of a radio documeniary entitled How Laughter Works.

§ John Morreall believes that laughter may indicate

A aninability to deal with fear.
B the need to break the ice.
C a feeling of ease in a social situation.

6 According to Morreall, some bosses use humour in order to

A be flattered by subordinates.
B manipulate subordinates’ behaviour.
C gain the respect of subordinates.

You hear a TV presenter talking about a programme he has worked on.

7 The presenter was unsure about working on the programme because

A_ he didn’t know the programme’s producer.
B he was familiar with the co-presenter’s work.
€ he had doubts about the finished product.

8 One criticism of the pilot programme was

A the pace proved to be too slow at one point.
B the presenters over-acted their lines.
C the subject failed to catch viewers’ attention.

Paper 4 Listening

=
a i

53



=== Page 31 ===

Test 2

Part 2

You will hear an engineer giving a talk on the radio about future developments in robot design.

For questions 9-17, complete the sentences with a word or short phrase.

Currently the field of

In the past, using the

The way birds flapped their wings and the arrangement of their

were believed to be the keys to flight.

Scientists are using the design of a

The flying robot could provide the

4 with photographs of the interiors
of collapsed buildings.

The flying robot must move at

fia in order to avoid hitting things.

The size of the flying robot means that the

ew have to fit in a small space.

Planes were ruled out as models for the flying robot because of the velocity needed for

BE | is providing aerodynamic information for robot design.

10 was the only way scientists could study birds in flight.

to help them build a small robot.

| e

tage

Engineers rejected helicopters as models for the flying robot because of the issue of

made during flight.

54

Paper 4 Listening

Part 3

You will hear a radio interview with a music critic, Hazel Fisher, about some classical music awards.
For questions 18-22, choose the answer (A, B, C or D) which fits best according to what you hear.

18 According to Hazel, what is bad about the current situation in the music business?

Fewer small record companies are issuing classical music.
Publicity is generally concentrated on too few performers.
Many good recordings are no longer available.

Record companies cannot find good new performers.

00 BP

19 In Hazel’s opinion the list of nominations suggested that a purpose of the awards was to

take advantage of current fashions in music.
publicise small record companies. (4
strengthen the promotion of serious music. i:

compartmentalise different types of music.

oO 8}.

20 What is Hazel’s main criticism of the way the winners will be chosen?

A The voters are unrepreseniative of the music industry.
6B The voiers have a vested interest in the resuits.

€ The voting is too time-consuming.

D_ The voting system is too complicated.

21 One of Hazel’s objections to the nominations themselves is that

A the criteria for making them were kept secret.
B they reflect too narrow a definition of music.
C they are too different to be comparable.

D there is none of a high enough standard.

22 Hazel sees it as ironic that the record companies

are inconsistent about what they consider classical music.

have spent so much on the awards while claiming to be short of money.
are attempting to popularise music thai has little appeal.

have introduced their own awards ceremony after condemning others.

oO

5S



=== Page 32 ===

Test 2

Part 4

You will hear two neighbours, Graham and Melinda, discussing changes that the town council are
making to a public park near their homes. For questions 23-28, decide whether the opinions are
expressed by only one of the speakers, or whether the speakers agree.

Write G _ for Graham,
M_ for Melinda,
or B_ for Both, where they agree.

23 The town council’s action is contrary to the original owner's wishes.

24 Late-night events will disturb local residents’ sleep.

25 Parking problems will be aggravated by the development.

26 There was not enough consultation with residents before the plans were put .
into action. ane

27 Commercial interests may have influenced the council's decision to proceed
with the plan.

28 It is now too late to prevent the work being completed.

56

Paper 5 Speaking

PAPERS SPEAKING (19 minutes)

There are two examiners. One (the Interlocutor) conducts the test, providing you with the necessary
materials and explaining what you have to do. The other examiner (the Assessor) will be introduced
to you, but then takes no further part in the interaction.

Part 1 (3 minutes)

The interlocutor first asks you and your partner a few questions which focus on information about
yourselves and personal opinions.

Part 2 (4 minutes)

In this part of the test you and your partner are asked to talk together. The Interlocutor places a
set of pictures on the table in front of you. This stimulus provides the basis for a discussion. The
interiocutor first asks an introductory question which focuses on one or two of the pictures. After
about a minute, the Interlocutor gives you both a decision-making task based on the same set of
pictures.

The pictures for Part 2 are on pages C4—C5 of the colour section.

Part 3 (12 minutes)

You are each given the opportunity to talk for two minutes, to comment after your partner has
spoken and to take part in a more general discussion.

The Interlocutor gives you a card with a question written on it and asks you to talk about it for
two minutes. After you have spoken, your partner is first asked to comment and then the
Interlocutor asks you both another question related to the topic on the card. This procedure is
repeated, so that your partner receives a card and speaks for two minutes, you are given an
opportunity to comment and a follow-up question is asked.

Finally, the Interlocutor asks some further questions, which leads to a discussion on a general
theme related to the subjects already covered in Part 3.

The cards for Part 3 are on pages C10—C11 of the colour section.



=== Page 33 ===

Test 3
PAPER 1 READING (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1

For questions 1-18, read the three texts below and decide which answer (A, B, C or D) best fits
each gap.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

Metals

It may have been a wish for self-adornment that (1) .... the interest of Stone Age peopie in metals.
Sitting by the side of a river, waiting for a fish to come within a spear’s throw, or just
(2) .... away a moment, one of our early ancestors might have happened upon a shiny yellow pebble
and plucked it off the river (8) .... . it did not have the feel of stone, but it was attractive. In such a
way, one could (4) .... that gold entered the lives of primitive people.

(5) .... the malleability of the metal, it very soon became a much sought-after material. Copper may
also have been discovered by accident, and once the value of copper tools was realised, the search
for its ores and for ways of getting the copper out of them was (6) .... with vigour. Thus,
metalworking was added to our ancestors’ battery of life-enhancing accomplishments.

1 A aroused B enlivened C cultivated D incited

2 A passing B idling © occupying D employing
3 A track B bed C floor D path

4 A conjecture B disclose C fabricate D prophesy
5 A Providing B Thanks Cc Given D Resulting
6 A raced B chased C tracked D pursued
Si ives

There was silence as we (7) .... our bags down the winding, cobbled lane that led to the heart of
town, (8) .... double against the force eight gale and trying in vain to avoid the icy waves that
(9) .... over the promenade. There was no one on the streets and the shutters in every cottage on

58

Paper 1 Reading

the waterfront were bolted tight against the battering. We had watched the weather worsen as we
chugged into Si Ives on the tiny single-track railway. As the ominous grey skies (10) .... in, visiting
Cornwall in the off-season — without a car — no longer seemed such a good idea. | had (11) .... my
friend into joining me with the (72) .... of walks along the beautiful Cornish coast, and snug evenings,
toasting ourselves before open fires.

7 A lugged B clambered C grabbed D lurnbered
& A leant B bent C_ sloped D borne

9 A smashed B engulfed C€ splattered D erupted

10 A folded B came C closed D blew

11 A drawn B lured € trapped D led

12 A provision B project C proposal D promise

Computer Modelling

The problem with studying the past is that it is past. The people who (13) .... in times of peace and
plenty and struggled through conflict and drought are long dead. The forces that (14) .... them to
setile here or move there, that brought them together as families and clans, villages and cities,
have (15) .... from memory. Archaeology provides (16) .... and clues, but we cannot test our
hypotheses with experiments on cultures living or dead. We cannot rewind the tape and waich a
replay of the past. Then again, perhaps we can.

Computer modelling allows us to recreate prehistoric landscapes and environments and (17) ....
them with virtual communities — digital creations with some of the needs, independence and
capabilities of real-world humans. We can establish (18) .... of conduct and replicate social units.
Then we can turn down the rainfall — or turn up the population — and watch how this cyber-culture
and its artificial people react.

13 A endured B enriched Cc prevailed D prospered
14 A sought B made G drove DB chose

15 A dissolved B faded C lapsed Dslipped
16 A hints B tips C prompts D cribs

17 A fulfil B inhabit C populate D settle

18 A etiquette B ways ¢ manners D rules

59



=== Page 34 ===

Test 3

Part 2

You are going to read four extracts which are all concerned in some way with language and
literature. For questions 19-26, choose the answer (A, B, © or D) which you think fits best

according to the text.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

How to Write Poetry

Telling people how to write poetry is a bit like frolicking through a minefield;
spontaneity is the order of the day, but one false step and a dozen certainties will
blow up in your face. Setting oneself up as a know-all is dangerous, so I have
decided to side-step the whole issue by saying that, for someone just beginning to
write, no advice can be a substitute for abundant reading, extensive writing, and
the freeing of the imagination and spirit in whatever way seems fruitful, barring
total anarchy. Some people need their life to be reasonably secure before a poem
will come; others can write their way out of misery. Some write to a timetable;
others wait for some moment of crystallisation, a brainwave or slow dawning. All
are right, providing they are not echoing some prescriptive score. And it’s this
finding of a tune which is important, hearing the still small voice inside yourself,
and feeding it, and watering it, and letting it out for air from time to time; one
day it'll be old enough to take care of itself.

19 How does the writer feel about advising people on how to write poetry?

nervous because she feels unqualified to do so
unhappy at being asked

wary of giving misleading guidance

anxious to keep poetry spontaneous

COUP

20 What is the writer emphasising when she says ‘not echoing some prescriptive score’
(line 10)?

A the need for originality
B the influence of music

C the search for inspiration
BD the nature of insight

60

line 10

21

22

Paper 1

The Short Story

In the short story there is no room for overcrowding with too many characters,
slabs of lengthy narrative, prolonged reminiscence or retrospection. Flashbacks
must be fleeting, and only used if there is no other way to throw light on an issue.
One effective way to do this is through a flash of memory in the leading character’s
mind; the recollection or reminder of an incident or scene, which stirred the
current conflict. Such a recollection can get the story on its way or take it a big step
forward at a crucial moment, but never at any time must it be allowed to put a
brake on the action. In this respect, dialogue is more useful than many aspiring
authors realise. Two voices in discussion can reveal two sides of a question in far
less time than it takes to explain it from only one person’s viewpoint. It also avoids
unnecessary wordage and holds or increases a reader’s interest. Overwriting can
kill a short story from the start, but this doesn’t mean that brevity must reduce it
to the level of a synopsis. Conflict and action must be as well sustained in a short
story as in a novel, but in the short story the art lies in making every word count
in a compact space.

According to the writer, flashbacks are used because they

can help clarify the characters’ reactions.

are a useful device for keeping the story moving.

can remind the reader of how the lead character thinks.
are the best way of throwing light on an incident.

O08}

According to the text, a short story writer should

use words judiciously.

cut back on some of the action.
try to use dialogue frequently.
keep the reader in suspense.

oO YP

Reading

61


=== Page 35 ===

Test 3

23

24

Screenplays

Anyone who knows how to play chess will understand how to write a screenplay
for a film. Most chess players stumble from beginning to end. We don’t know much,
but we know enough to play. We move without really knowing what’s going to
happen further on in the game. Maybe we can see one or two moves ahead, and,
if we can, we’re pleased by our uncanny ability to see even that far ahead. Better
than the days when we couldn’t see ahead at all — when we were playing blindly.

Over time, as we learned more about playing chess, we made a startling revelation:
chess depends more upon long-term strategy than upon short-term tactics. Up till
then, we'd been happy with a rather short-sighted approach. Suddenly, we became
aware of ‘the big picture’. We began to see the game as a whole, not just a series
of individual moves. And once we saw the game as a whole, we began to see
patterns emerge in the play. Gambits, they call them. And the patterns have names,
such as openings, middle games and end games. In chess, as in screenplay writing,
the more often you play, the more aware you become of its complexities.

According to the writer, how do inexperienced chess players feel?

delighted to be able to finish a game
encouraged by each improvement
amazed by how quickly they learn
pleased to be able to play with confidence

oO.

The writer compares chess and screenplay writing in order to

explain that we learn both by trial and error.
emphasise the fixed nature of both processes.
suggest that success depends on attention to detail.
demonstrate the importance of having a plan.

GO.

25

Paper 1 Reading

Looking at Writing

‘Man has an instinctive tendency to speak, as we see in the babble of our young children;
while no child has an instinctive tendency to bake, brew, or write.’ More than a century
ago, Charles Darwin got it right: language is a human instinct, but written language is
not. Language is found in all societies, present and past. Although languages change, they
do not improve: English is no more complex than the languages of Stone Age tribes;
modern English is not an advance of Old English. All healthy children master their
language without lessons or corrections. When children are thrown together without a
usable language, they invent one of their own. Compare all this with writing.

Writing systems have been invented only infrequently in history. They originated only
in a few complex civilisations and they started off crude and slowly improved over the
millennia. Until recently, most children never learned to read or write; even with today’s
universal education, many children struggle and fail. A group of children is no more
likely to invent an alphabet than it is to invent the internal combustion engine. Children
are wired for sound, but print is an optional accessory that must be painstakingly bolted
on. We need to understand how the contraption called writing works, how the minds
of the children work, how to get the two to mesh.

What point does the writer make about children?

They have no real need for formal learning.

They are able to create new forms of language.

They are able to communicate in the absence of language.
Their minds are sharper than we think.

COW Bb

26 What point is made about the process of learning to write?

It is facilitated by machinery.

It is best done collaboratively.

It prepares us for other concepis.
It requires a conscious effort.

uO



=== Page 36 ===

Test 3

Part 3

You are going to read an extract from a magazine article about global warming. Seven
paragraphs have been removed from the extract. Choose from the paragraphs AH the one
which fits each gap (27-33). There is one extra paragraph which you do not need to use.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

The Heat is On

We've all heard of global warming, but just how much warmer
will the earth get and how will it affect our lives?

Almost everyone has some idea of what global warming
is all about, but no one is quite sure about its
consequences. A warmer climate is likely to mean
changes to the weather in all parts of the world. And
since the atmosphere is intimately linked to every aspect
of the planet on which we live, any changes to climate
will have significant knock-on effects for plants and
animals, as well as water and soils.

=
|
|

There is no doubt, for example, that over the last 100
years or so, human action has significantly increased the
atmospheric concentrations of several gases — the so-
called greenhouse gases ~ which are closely related to
global temperature. It seems likely that these increased
concentrations, which are set to continue building up in
the near future, are already affecting global climate, but
our poor knowledge and understanding of the global
heat balance make the current and future situations
uncertain. What we do know is that atmospheric
concentrations of greenhouse gases have fluctuated in
close harmony with global temperatures over the past
40,000 years.

A lot of research has gone into predicting the conditions
that will result from higher global temperatures. Most
of this research uses computer programs known as
general circulation models, or GCMs. They run
on powerful computers, use fundamental laws of
physics and chemistry to analyse the interaction of
temperature, pressure, solar radiation and other climatic
‘actors to predict climatic conditions for the past, present
or future.

ae

a}

64

Despite these research difficulties, most people agree
on perhaps the most important aspect of climatic
change from the viewpoint of contemporary human
societies: the rate of change will be faster than anything
we have previously experienced. In this case, the
approximate predictions produced by the GCMs are
being used to gain some insight into the nature and
conditions of the world that we will inhabit over the next
few generations.

2 |

These forecasts should leave us in little doubt about the
potential impact of climatic change on the natural
environment and humans. Changes in climate have the
potential to affect the geographical location of ecological
systems, such as forests and grasslands, the mix of
species they contain and their ability to provide the
various benefits on which societies depend for their
continued existence. Thus, the whole range of
resources on which we rely is sensitive to changes in
climate. This includes food production, water resources
and human settlements. The effects, some of which are
potentially irreversible, are likely to be unfavourable in
many areas.

The most important climatic factor observed in this case
was the rise, in recent decades, of the minimum
temperature. Among other things, the warmer
temperatures have meant fewer frosts, and this has
caused less damage to harvests.

However, many of the predicted effects of future
climate warming are far from beneficial. Relatively small
changes in climate can influence the availability of water,
either due to long-term drying of the climate or by
increasing the frequency of droughts. Associated
problems are likely to arise first in arid and semi-arid

regions and more humid areas where demand or
pollution have already created shortages.

A further undesirable effect is likely to be changes to
glacial processes. This will impact on glacier ice, ground
ice and sea ice, which in turn will affect vegetation,
wildlife habitats and human structures and facilities.
Indeed, there is a strong possibility that the Arctic’s ice
cover will melt completely, making marine transport and
oil and gas exploration easier but increasing the danger
from icebergs.

But probably the most dramatic and visible effect o
global warming in the twenty-first or ‘greenhouse’
century will be the rise in sea levels. This will be caused

Paper 1 Reading

by the thermal expansion of the oceans — warmer water
occupies a greater volume than cold water — and the
added input from melting ice. With scientists calculating
that about half of the world’s population live in coastal
zones, the consequences of rising sea levels are
potentially very severe.

=
a

Arguably the most severe consequences would be
experienced by several small, low-lying island states,
since entire countries could cease to exist if worst-case
scenarios are realised. The consequences would be
devastating, not only for the people and culture of these
islands, but also for the countries that would need to
accommodate those who had been displaced.

A The Mediterranean Basin is one example of this and
in recent decades decreasing trends in precipitation
totals have already been identified in western-centra
parts of the basin as well as marked changes in
seasonality. A clear tendency for rainfall to be
concentrated into a shorter period of the year has
been noted in the Alentejo region of southem
Portugal, with the proportion of annual rainfall
falling in autumn and winter, increasing at the
expense of spring totals.

B Unfortunately, they are simplifications of the real
world and have numerous deficiencies. Their results
are only approximate and they are also slow to run
and expensive to use. Part of the problem is that we
do not understand fully all the processes of the
climatic system, although we do realise its
complexity.

© Increased flooding and inundation are the most
obvious results, with London, New York and Tokyo
being just a few of the candidates for significant
disruption. Huge numbers of people stand to lose
their homes and livelihoods and this could produce
many millions of environmental refugees.

D But this would not be true for all. In fact, some
climate change impacts will probably be beneficial.
Scientists in some countries have already identified
useful environmental trends that are closely linked to
the warming that has occurred to date. In Australia,
for example, research has shown that the average
yield of wheat has increased by about 0.5 tonnes per
hectare since 1952, and climate trends have played a
significant part in this greater food production.

G We humans have learned to use such natural

H Currently, they suggest that the average annual

E This would indicate that the two are almost certainly
related. Evidence gleaned from a range of sources
suggests that our planet has warmed at the surface by
about 6°C over the past century. Most scientists think
that this trend is unlikely to be natural in origin and
is, in part, a result of human pollution of the
atmosphere.

F This proves that the earth’s climate has never been
static and human impact on climate has been
relatively minor, compared to naturally occurring
large-scale perturbations. Ice ages, for example,
result from natural changes in the earth’s orbit
around the sun. But the most worrying type of
human-induced climatic change has been brought
about through modifications to the natural
atmospheric mix of greenhouse gases.

resources to our advantage, enabling us to produce
food, build great cities and support six billion
members of the human race. Any changes to these
resources have to be taken seriously. The problem we
have is knowing just how the world will change, and
what is causing these changes.

global surface temperature will increase by between
1°C and 3.5°C by the year 2100; that the average sea
level around the world will rise by 15-95 cm; and
that changes in the spatial and temporal patterns of
precipitation will occur. Scientists also expect
extreme weather conditions, such as heatwaves,
floods and droughts, to become more frequent in
some places.



=== Page 37 ===

Test 3

Part 4

You are going to read an article on maps. For questions 34-40, choose the answer (A, B, © or
DB) which you think fits best according to the text.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

Maps

The purpose of a map is to express graphically the relations of points and features on the earth’s surface to
each other. These are determined by distance and direction. In early times distance was often expressed in
units of time, for example ‘so many hours’ march’ or ‘a day’s journey by river’, but such measurements gave
more information about the relative ease of crossing the local terrain than they did about actual distance. The
other element is direction, but for the ordinary traveller, whose main concern was ‘Where do I go from here?’
and ‘How far away is it?’, the accurate representation of direction was not of primary importance, Partly for
this reason, written itineraries for a long time rivalled maps. Even today, certain types of maps, for example
those showing railway systems, may make little attempt to show true directions. Similarly, conspicuous
landmarks along a route were at first indicated by signs, realistic or conventional, and varied in size to indicate
their importance. Clearly the conventions employed varied with the purpose of the map, and also from place
to place, so that in studying early maps the first essential is to understand the particular convention employed.

The history of cartography is largely that of the increase in the accuracy with which these elements of
distance and direction are determined and in the comprehensiveness of the map content. In this development,
cartography has called in other sciences to its aid. For example, instead of determining direction by observing
the position of a shadow at midday, or of a constellation in the night sky, or even of a steady wind, use was
made of terrestrial magnetism through the magnetic compass, and instruments were evolved which enabled
horizontal angles to be calculated with great accuracy.

The application of astronomical concepts, and the extension of the knowledge of the world through
exploration, encouraged attempts to map the known world. Then astronomers discovered that the earth is not
a perfect sphere, but is flattened slightly at the poles, which introduced further refinements into the mapping
of large areas. Meanwhile, the demands being made of the map maker were shifting significantly. The traveller
or the merchant ceased to be the sole user of maps. The soldier, especially after the introduction of artillery,
and the problems of range, field of fire, and dead ground which it raised, demanded an accurate representation
of the surface features, in place of the earlier conventional or pictorial delineation, and a solution in any degree
satisfactory was not reached until the contour was invented.

Then there was the archaeologist, the historian and, much later, the modern geographer, each with their own
special requirements. In order to address these, the present-day cartographer has had to evolve methods of
mapping all kinds of ‘distributions’, from geological strata and climatic regimes to land use. It is the present
widespread recognition of the value of the map in the co-ordination and interpretation of phenomena in many
sciences that has led to what may truly be called a modern renaissance of cartography.

It would be misleading of me to represent the stages summarily sketched above as being either continuous
or consecutive. There have been periods of retrogression or stagnation, broken by others of rapid development,
during which outmoded ideas have held their place beside the new. Again, cartographers have constantly
realised the theoretical basis for progress, but have had to wait for technical improvement in their instruments
before they could apply their new ideas. Since the easiest way to make a map is to copy an old one, and
considerable capital has often been locked up in printing plates or stock, map publishers have often been
resistant to new ideas. Consequently, maps must never be accepted uncritically as evidence of contemporary
knowledge and technique.

Clearly, the maps, many thousands in number, which have come down to us today, are the results of much
human work and thought. They constitute therefore an invaluable record for the student of man’s past. It is
above all this aspect that makes the study of historical cartography so fascinating and so instructive.

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

Paper 1 Reading

Why might early maps have been misleading?

A
B
Cc
DB

Distances could not be calculated reliably.
They were based on written itineraries.
They were drawn by ordinary travellers.
Distances tended to be exaggerated.

What probiem did early maps exhibit when showing landmarks?

GO.

The signs used bore little relation to the landmarks.
The selection of landmarks was flawed.

They used symbols that were not standardised.
They sometimes incorporated unimportant features.

In the second paragraph, the writer says that better quality map-making was facilitated by

DP

Cc
D

a greater understanding of climatic factors.
greater accuracy in draughtsmanship.
more precision in measurement.

more intensive map production.

What prompted the search for a more precise means of mapping the physical geography of
the landscape?

oO W>

a discovery in astronomy

the growth of mathematical science
the activities of the great explorers
military considerations

The writer implies that present-day cartographers

oP

c
Db

have to be highly adaptabie.

enjoy a high status in the scientific world.
are rediscovering the value of early maps.
have achieved something extraordinary.

The writer points out that his own account of the history of map-making is based on

GOW }&

a rather traditional view.

certain theoretical assumptions.

a simplification of complex processes.
somewhat unreliable data.

What point is the writer making about publishers of maps?

COO

Their technical equipment holds them back.
They are inhibited by financial considerations.
They are critical of cartographers.

Their conservatism limits map production.

67


=== Page 38 ===

Test 3

RITIN . .
PAPER 2 WRITING (2 hours) Visual materials for Paper 5

Part 1 TEST 1 PAPER 5 Conference programme — Pressure at work

You must answer this question. Write your answer in 300~—350 words in an appropriate style.

1 Your tutor shows you two extracts from articles about employment in the future.

} The rise in unemployment cannot be stopped. The number of
unemployed people will continue to rise as more and more jobs
are done by machines and computers. We now live in a global
economy, and more and more people will lose their jobs as
competition and profits dominate the world.

The future offers all kinds of exciting job opportunities. New
kinds of industry are developing all the time, and there will

always be new kinds of employment. The future of work has
never looked better.

Your tutor asks you to write an essay about employment in the future, responding to the points
raised and giving your own views on the matter.

Write your essay.


=== Page 39 ===

C2

ic

1D

Visual materials for Paper 5



=== Page 40 ===

TEST 2 PAPER & Environmental campaign — Local transport Visual materials for Paper 5

2B

C4



=== Page 41 ===

TEST 3 PAPER 5 Magazine covers — Insurance company Visual materials for Paper 5

3B



=== Page 42 ===

TEST 4 PAPER 5 Nature magazine — importance of water Visual materials for Paper 5

4A



=== Page 43 ===

TEST 1

TEST 1

Why do many older people say that the past

In what ways can we best undersiand the history of
was better?

our country?

*® books » education

* people ° social values

* places ° pace of life
TEST 2 TEST 2

What are the effects of technological development What makes a language develop and change?

on our lives? .
° different uses

° work ° different generations
° health . ° different fashions
° leisure
TEST 3
TEST 3

What are the attractions and drawbacks of
What makes someone a good learner? being a teacher?
° different ages d e working with people
e interest ® working conditions
¢ role of teacher ay e sharing knowledge
TEST 4
TEST 4

What does successful communication between

people depend on? How has technology helped, or not helped,

; communication?
® circumstances
° relationships

« use of language

® convenience
© dependence
* cost



=== Page 44 ===

TEST 4

What are the strengths and weaknesses of the
different forms of mass media?

® news
° education
° entertainment

Paper 2 Writing

Part 2

Write an answer to one of the questions 2—5 in this part. Write your answer in 300-350 words in an
appropriate style.

2 Acompany is planning to launch a new magazine called Healthy Lifestyles for the Young. The
editor wants to find out what people would like to read in the magazine, and is inviting proposals
about the possible content as well as ideas on how to make the magazine appeal to young
people.

Write a proposal.

3 A magazine called Nature and Wild Life is inviting readers to send in their ideas on helping to
protect endangered animals, birds and plants. You decide to write a letter to the magazine with
your suggestions.

Write your letter. Do not write any postal addresses.

4 Apopuiar magazine has invited readers to send in articles for their series on ‘Good Neighbours’.
Readers are invited to write an article entitled ‘Good neighbours are worth their weight in gold’.
Write your article describing a particular occasion when a neighbour helped you out in a difficult
situation, and say what you think makes a good neighbour.

Write your article.

5 Based on your reading of one of these books, write on one of the following.
{a) Anne Tyler: The Accidental Tourist
A magazine is inviting readers to send in articles on the theme of marital breakdown in modern
literature. You write an article in which you discuss the reasons for the failure of Sarah and
Macon’s marriage in The Accidental Tourist, and say how far you agree or disagree with
Macon’s cornment that it was due to ‘essential incompaiibility’.

Write your article.

{b) John Wyndham: The Day of the Triffids
You read the following in a letter to a literary magazine:

, ns science fiction the humans are “always represented as being |
better than any other life-forms they meet.

ETE oT arr age Pe memento tm

Having just read The Day of the Triffids, you decide to write a letter to the editor saying whether
you agree or disagree with this statement, making reference to the human characters and the
triffids in the story.

Write your letter. Do not write any postal addresses.

(c) Graham Greene: Our Man in Havana

The Arts Section of a newspaper is planning a series of reviews on famous spy stories. You
decide to send in a review of Our Man in Havana, iocusing on Wormoid as a secret agent and
showing how far the novel can be regarded as a typical spy story.

Write your review.

69



=== Page 45 ===

Test 3
PAPER 3 USE OF ENGLISH (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1

For questions 1-15, read the text below and think of the word which best fits each space. Use only
one word in each space. There is an example at the beginning (0).

Write your answers in CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet.

Example: |0|/A |

Waiter on the moon

As (0) ......4....... result of the recent discovery of lunar water, the moon has suddenly become a

far more interesting place for investors, (1)... must now view the long-term prospects with
optimism. The last manned mission to the moon drew (2) ....0........ a close in 1973, (3) wow.
iwo astronauts from Apollo 17 climbed back into their lunar module, (4) ............... collected a lot of
moonrock, but bereft (5)... any future plans. Now the moon shines brighter for astronauts
and scientists alike, (6)... to the existence of (7)... might be billions of tonnes of water
at (8) 00... poles.

There is (Q) woe high-tech substitute for water in space exploration. To support the
international space station, (10) 0... has cost at least $100,000 a day to send water
4) orbit. Not (12) wo. would lunar water cut these costs, but it would additionally
be used for rocket fuel, (13) oo. two components, liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen, are the

elements found in water.

Scientists are particularly excited (14) 0... , given the absence of an atmosphere, lunar water
has never been recycled and they believe, therefore, that it (15) 00. very well hold clues to
the formation of the solar system itself.

Paper 3 Use of English

Pari 2
For questions 16—25, read the text below. Use the word given in capitals at the end of some of
the lines to form a word that fits in the space in the same line. There is an example at the
beginning (0).

Write your answers in CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet.

Example: | 0||C|H ALLILIE N[G[ [NG | |

ANTHROPOLOGY

One of the most (0) challenging. aspects of the science of anthropology CHALLENGE
comes from its fieldwork. Certainly, in its (16) ow... as a profession, INFANT

anthropology was distinguished by its concentration on so-called ‘primitive

societies’ in which social {17} .. ... appeared to be fairly limited and social INSTITUTE
interaction to be conducted almost (18) v0... face-to-face. Such societies, EXCLUDE
it was felt, provided anthropologists with a valuable (19) .............. into the SEE
workings of society that contrasted with the many complexities of more highly

developed societies. There was aiso a sense that the ways of life represented

by these smaller societies were rapidly (20) ............... and that preserving a APPEAR

record of them was a matter of some urgency.

The (29) oe of anthropologists to the first-hand collection of dataledthem COMMIT

to some of the most (22) .... .. places on earth. Most often they worked ACCESS

alone. Such lack of contact with other people created feelings of intense

(23) in some anthropologists, especially in the early stages of LONELY
fieldwork. Nevertheless, this process of (24) ............... in a totally alien culture IMMERSE
continues to attract men and women to anthropology, and is

(25) wee the most effective way of understanding in depih how other DENY

people see the world.



=== Page 46 ===

Test 3 Paper 3 Use of English

Part 3 29 The interpretation given is, in fact, the oo. eects taken by most modern thinkers.
For questions 26-31, think of one word only which can be used appropriately in all three sentences. Kate could hear the sighs of impatience growing in the ....... cesses of customers
Here is an exampie (0). ; behind her.
Example: The company’s annual trading figures remained broadly in oo... with
expectations.

0 Some of the tourists are hoping io get compensation for the poor state of the hotel, and | think
they have @ VELY weer case.

30 Dr Saunders was completely overwhelmed by the . .. of work she faced

There’s no point in irying to wade across the river, the current is far 100 eee .

every day.
if you’re asking me which of the candidates should get the job, I'm afraid | don’t have any
sevecsecesaecacenentsneeneaseneaness views either way. : Hf YOU TUF The oo eeeeeeees UP any More, we'll get complaints from the neighbours.
[o|[s| Tlelolnie [| | The writer’s S@CONG oes of short stories has been well received by critics,
though sales are disappointing.
Write only the missing word in CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet.
31 Everybody who read the articles must have DEEN oes by the courage
shown by the little boy in the face of such adversity.
26 Affer further oes , the company decided not to appeal against the council’s
refusal of their planning application. | Mr and Mrs Davenport bought a house in France a few years AGO ANd oo...
there once they had retired.
The fact that we have not asked you to do this job iS NO oe eeeeee on your work.
lt was clear from the graceful way in which the Qitl 0... eee that she had had
For a moment everyone in the room was dazzled by the wees of the sun on ballet training.
the glass.
27 Stuart is an excellent actor but he CANNOt uo... cece criticism of any sort.

The insurers said the company would have to ... .... some of the costs of

repairing the damaged wall.

Both of the children oo eee a very strong resemblance to their grandfather.

28 Children can be very difficult at the age of two, but it’s just a developmental
cheseeeeseneneceesenseeseeacatenenes they go through.

Negotiations between the two companies are at a CrUCIAL oceans anda
decision is expected later today.

The mayor's opening speech set the ....
celebrate the village’s 800” anniversary.

... for the programme of events to

72



=== Page 47 ===

Test 3

Part 4

For questions 32-38, complete the second sentence so that it has a similar meaning to the first
sentence, using the word given. Do not change the word given. You must use between three

and eight words, including the word given.

Here is an example (0).

Example:

6 Bo you mind if | watch while you paint?

objection

Write only ihe missing words on the separate answer sheet.

32 The news of the merger came as a complete surprise to the workers.
aback

TINE WOPKENS cece ceceessssesssseeeeeeeeeeasenececstessenesssassssecesusseessassreansseesestssseneaeeneas the news of the
merger.

33 Everybody in the audience stood to applaud the acitor’s performance.
standing

THE ACLOF WAS oe eeceeceeteseeeesesteneseeseeseeee .. for his

performance.

34 Bo phone us when you arrive at the airport, even if it is late.
how

INO occ ccccceccsscssecesseresuecsecunssussesssecarsueeansenassessessessessesesesesetaneseseesanees is when you arrive at the
airport, do phone us.

35

36

37

38

39

Paper 3 Use of English

it was obvious that Andrew was completely unaware of what was happening.
idea

Andrew ODVIOUSIY Nad oo... eescecseecseesseesseessseessecsnessuecssnesesssesssneesecssssssneaeessuuesssenseeseeenees on.

| seer to have been in this queue for nours.
joined

TE SOOMS LIKE oo. cceccccesteseseeeesesensseesesesecscaesusassssnenseeseacaneneieasseeeeeececstsesesecees this queue.

Would it be possibie to speak to you in private for a moment?
having

is there word with you?

There is a remarkable similarity in how the two sisters dress.
alike

The two sisters ...

What explanation can we offer for this sudden drop in temperature?
account

HOW ooececceecessessnesssenscssesessseeneensssucseccuecsessussucuessesqussueenessuseuccaeeneeaneaneess temperature has suddenly
dropped?

... Way they dress.

75



=== Page 48 ===

Test 3

For questions 40-44, read the following texts on psychology. For questions 40-43, write a word
or short phrase. You do not need to write complete sentences. For question 44, write a summary

Part 5

according to the instructions given.

Write your answers to questions 40~44 on the separate answer sheet.

On the one hand, the psychology of perception is connected to the senses themselves
(sight, hearing, etc.), and on the other hand to the sensory data received. The
constancy and repetitiveness of stimuli, the way they are represented and their
reciprocal relationships are perceived to different degrees by the sensory organs. Each
individual learns about the world through these organs, but what we discern not only
depends on our previous experiences, but also on our needs.

The things around us create spheres of stimuli to which we react as a whole, often
without considering the component parts. For example, we perceive a picture or a
melody, not flecks of colour or individual notes. Similarly, we place our experiences
within a framework of time and space, so it is natural for us to accept the cause-and-
effect relationship between our pressing a switch and a light coming on. Perceptual
identification develops in a child precisely through this constancy and repetition of
events, which is responsible for our awareness of the permanent qualities and
functions of individual objects.

We acquire our perception of the world intellectually. Hence when we turn our
attention from one thing to another, we believe that what we are looking at stays
where it is, or if it is moving, that it continues to move; in other words that the object
‘behaves’ as we think it should.

40 What, according to the writer, do people do with the sensory data they receive?

4

42

43

44

Paper 3 Use of English

Our awareness of the material world requires physical receptors, the five senses
which enable us to see, hear, feel, taste and smell. These reveal our
environment to us, but only those selected aspects of it in relation to which we
have to act and react. For in selecting, our senses exclude much more than they
let in. They have developed to aid our survival as organisms occupying our

particular evolutionary niche, and they accordingly function as meshes through line 6

which only a certain range of signals can pass. If the whole range of light waves
affected us, we would be unable to distinguish objects affecting our survival. If
every sound wave registered in our consciousness, we would be so confused
by the universal cacophony as to be unable to react to the sounds that we need
to hear.

The process by which we are aware of the physical environment is extremely
complex. It is also normally a successful process as otherwise the species would
not have survived. Each species has been programmed through the
evolutionary process to interpret the signals of the physical environment
correctly as they affect that particular life form, and this applies to humans too.
There are of course some cultural differences, although these do not affect the
basic fact that we have very little cognitive freedom at this level of awareness.

Explain why the writer says that the senses are like ‘meshes’ (line 6).

How do human beings in different parts of the world interpret the signals of their physical
environment?

In a paragraph of 50-70 words, summarise in your own words as far as possible what

the two texts say would be the effect on our lives if our senses allowed us to be fully aware

of all the stimuli from the physical world. Write your summary on the separate answer

sheet.

77



=== Page 49 ===

Test 3
PAPER 4 LISTENING (40 minutes approximately)

Part 1

You will hear four different extracts. For questions 1-8, choose the answer (A, B or €) which fits
best according to what you hear. There are two questions for each extract.

pee

pee

ESSE aera nes

You hear part of an interview with a balioonist talking about his career.

1 What impression does the interviewer gain from reading the balloonist’s book?

A He aimed to become rich.
B He was only interested in having fun. a
C He has turned a fantasy into reality. =

2 How did the balloonist respond io his first balloon flight?

B He used it as a springboard to get into advertising.
€ He saw the potential to exploit ballooning commercially.

A He felt privileged to have had this opportunity. |

You hear part of an interview with a photographer about his new book of photographs of famous
women.

3 What was the photographer's aim in producing the book?

A to promote only high-profile celebrities as
B to show a hidden facet of the women
C to explore contradictions in the women’s personalities

4 What was the particular challenge of each photograph?

A changing the popular image of the famous women a
8 capturing the essence of the women’s fame
€ dealing with information given in confidence

Paper 4 Listening

eerie

ee ee
‘Extract 3

You hear a football fan talking about his team on a radio phone-in programme.

§ in the speaker's opinion, the football team lost their recent match because of

A the players’ lack of enthusiasm.
B insufficient training for the team.
€ a poor managerial decision.

6 Why is the speaker cautiously optimistic about the team’s future?

A He is sure that the team can be rebuilt.
B He knows who the new goal-scorer will be.
C He is confident that the fans will support their team.

You hear a museum curator talking on the radio about a sail that was last used on a sailing ship
about two hundred years ago.

7 What happened when the sail was put on show in the museum?

A The museum had to re-organise its exhibition space.
B The curator’s factual research was appreciated by the public.
C_ The exhibition had a more powerful effect than the curator had expected.

8 The curator describes the physical condition of the sail in order to stress its

A fragility. .
B authenticity.

Cc beauty.



=== Page 50 ===

Test 3 Paper 4 Listening

Part 2 : Part 3
You will hear a short talk about a bird of prey called the kestrel. For questions 9-17, complete You will hear the historian, George Davies, talking about society and the theatre in England in the
the sentences with a word or short phrase. : time of William Shakespeare. For questions 18-22, choose the answer (A, B, © or D) which fits

best according to what you hear.

The name ‘kestrel’ derives from its ery which sounds like a : 18 What is Professor Davies’ view of the level of literacy in sixteenth-century England?

>

it was increasing steadily.

B_ It matched his expectations.

¢ li contributed to social unrest.

Dit was uniform across the social spectrum.

as breeding sites.

Originally, kestrels only used

In urban areas, kestrels are often to be found on the : 19 What, according to Professor Davies, was the advantage of the usual method of
ieee — communication in the sixteenth century?
a of buildings.
ee A People were more direct in the way they spoke.
. B it made peopie paitien listeners.
The kestrel is able to ; C People absorbed more of what they heard.
rapidly and this has ensured its survival until now. Dit encouraged close relationships between people.
Sheep eat vegetation and this destroys the 20 Professor Davies believes that Shakespeare’s company developed their basic acting skills by
L a) needed by the kestrels’ prey. A reciting their lessons.
— B attending special voice classes. 30.
€ learning from Shakespeare himself. ay
Problems with D_ imitating the style of other actors.
Pe
Ee [| are caused by prolonged rain and snow.
se 21 What, in Professor Davies’ view, was the advantage of sixteenth-century theatres?
The current aduit kestrel population is believed to number A They made use of natural light.
a B They were shaped like a sports arena.
| thousand birds. C They encouraged the appreciation of drama.
ee D The performances were complemented by everyday life.
Relatively few young kestrels survive because of
6 by their parents. 22 According to Professor Davies, sixteenth-century plays were expected to deal with
A personal confessions.
, B character development. | Lee
Information about the it | : G intimate emotions. :
Peay D matters of state.

of kestrels is the most important fact to include on the sighting form.

80



=== Page 51 ===

Test 3

Part 4
You will hear a conversation in which Ciare and Torn, who teach English to foreign students at the
same language school, discuss Tom’s first week at the school. For questions 23-28, decide whether
the opinions are expressed by only one of the speakers, or whether the speakers agree.

Write © for Ciare,

T for Tom,
or 6B for Both, where they agree.
23 The physical conditions don’t live up to the image the school wants to a
promote. Ee
24 The owners of the school need to adapt to cope with the realities of | 24 |
competition. ne
25 Schools can stay independent if they target specific groups of customers. |

26 Professionally, teachers benefit more from working with colleagues in the
same field than with those in different fields.

27 Teachers are responsible for managing their relationships with classes.

28 Job satisfaction is more important than the salary.

Paper 5 Speaking

PAPERS SPEAKING (19 minutes)

There are two examiners. One (the interlocutor) conducts the test, providing you with the necessary
materials and explaining what you have to do. The other examiner (the Assessor) will be introduced
to you, but then takes no further part in the interaction.

Part 1 (3 minutes)

The interlocutor first asks you and your pariner a jew questions which focus on information about
yourselves and personal opinions.

Part 2 (4 minutes)

In this part of the test you and your partner are asked to talk together. The interlocutor places a
set of pictures on the table in front of you. This stimulus provides the basis for a discussion. The
Interlocutor first asks an introductory question which focuses on one or two of the pictures. After
about a minute, the Interlocutor gives you both a decision-making task based on the same set of
pictures.

The pictures for Part 2 are on pages C6~-C7 of the colour section.

Part 3 (12 minutes)

You are each given the opportunity to talk for two minutes, to comment after your partner has
spoken and to take part in a more general discussion.

The Interlocutor gives you a card with a question written on it and asks you to talk about it for
two minutes. After you have spoken, your partner is first asked to comment and then the
interlocutor asks you both another question related to the topic on the card. This procedure is
repeated, so that your partner receives a card and speaks for two minutes, you are given an
opportunity to comment and a follow-up question is asked.

Finally, the Interlocutor asks some further questions, which leads to a discussion on a general
theme related to the subjects already covered in Part 3.

The cards for Part 3 are on pages C10-C11 of the colour section.



=== Page 52 ===

Test 4
PAPER 1 READING (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1

For questions 1-18, read the three texts below and decide which answer (A, B, © or D) best fits
each gap.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

Surviving in a Foreign Land

| have been welcomed warmly. It’s a sociable and well-provisioned base camp in a very, very
isolated place. At any one time, there are some forty odd souis — scientists, students, weathermen,
satellite trackers — in a (4) .... community where everyone mucks (2) .... . My school French is
proving adequate — just — to (3) ...., but not to chat or banter. | miss the nuances, and my
phrasebook is useless at breakfast.

There is no practical problem for me in this, but initially there was a problem of self-confidence. !
found myself slightly dreading mealtimes. | would (4) .... , worried about which table to choose,
terrified at the silence which (5) .... when | spoke, anxious in a way | cannot remember since the
first weeks of school. | still grin inanely, or panic when people talk to me. | suspect the cause of
this occasional depression is nothing to do with loss of company or communication; it’s because
I’ve lost the social predominance which my own gift of the gab has always (6) .... me.

1 A close-knit B close-fitting ¢  close-run D_ close-cropped
2 A about B around Cc in D up

3 A articulate B communicate C converse D interpret

4 A_ bend back B turn back Clean back DB hang back

5 A dropped B fell Chit D struck

6 A. afforded B empowered Cc entitled D_ presented
Elliot

When | first met Elliot, | was just a young author like any other and he took no notice of me. He
never forgot a face though, and when | (7) .... him here or there he shook hands with me cordially,

84

Paper 1 Reading

but showed no desire to (8) .... our acquaintance; and if | saw him at the opera, say, he being with
a person of high rank, he was (9) .... not to catch sight of me. But then | (10) .... to make a somewhat
startling success as a playwright, and presently | became aware that Elliot (11) .... me with a warmer
feeling. One day, | received a note from him asking me to lunch and | conceived the (72) .... that
he was trying me out. But from then on, since my success had brought me many new friends, |
began to see him more frequently.

7 A ran across B fell in with ¢ saw through D took up with
8 A accelerate B advance ¢ further D promote
9 A_ inclined B inspired C_ vulnerable D susceptible
10 A developed B happened ¢ transpired D grew
11, A heid B observed € took D regarded
12 A_ impression B suspicion C notion D opinion

Alfred Hitchcock

The film director Alfred Hitchcock always insisted that he didn’t care about the (13) .... matter
of his films, or (14) .... about the acting, but that he did care about the photography and the
soundtrack and aii the technical ingredients. For Hitchcock, it wasn’t a message that (15) .... the
audience, nor was it a great performance; he believed that people are aroused by pure film,
(16) .... of their cultural background. Therefore, if a picture is designed correctly, in terms of its
emotional (17) .... , the Japanese audience should scream at the same moment as the Indian
audience.

Hitchcock's self-appraisal was always precise, rational, deceptively unanswerable; he was a man
of reason and a craftsman of genius who liked to hear an audience scream. He didn’t deal in
speculation, abstraction or intellectual allusion, and his assessment of his own screen characters
was not exploratory. He set his (78) ... on film, pure film, and the most dispassionate,
mathematically calculable beauty of what a sirip of film can be made to do to an audience.

13 A_ topic B content © subject D theme

14 A whether 5 indeed C instead D raiher

15 A stirred B riled Cc raised DB sparked

16 A unremarked B unrelated C irrelevant D irrespective
17 A invoivement B feedback C impact BD response
i8 A views B targets Cc saims BD sights

85



=== Page 53 ===

Test 4

You are going to read four extracts which are all concerned in some way with academic disciplines.
For questions 19-26, choose the answer (A, B, € or D) which you think fits best according to the

text.

Part 2

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

19

20

Oral Mistery

The growing trend for historians to rely on oral evidence is not without its problems. It
is naive to suppose that someone’s testimony represents a pure distillation of past
experience, for in an interview each party is affected by the other. It is the historian who
selects the informant and indicates the area of interest; and even if he or she asks no
questions and merely listens, the presence of an outsider affects the atmosphere in which
the informant recalls the past and talks about it. The end product is conditioned both by
the historian’s social position vis-a-vis the informant, and by the terms in which he or
she has learnt to analyse the past and which may well be communicated to the informant.
In other words, historians must accept responsibility for their share in creating new
evidence. But the difficulties are far from over when the historian is removed from the
scene. For not even the informant is in direct touch with the past. His or her memories
may be contaminated by what has been absorbed from other sources (especially the
media); they may be overlaid by nostalgia (‘times were good then’), or distorted by a sense
of grievance about deprivation in childhood, which only took root in later life. To anyone
listening, the feelings and attitudes are often what lends conviction to the testimony, yet
they may be the emotional residue of later events rather than the period in question.

The writer thinks that historians who are collecting data from oral sources should

use methods of coliecting the data that are demonstrably reliable.

adapt the way they conduct the interview to suit individual informants.
consider the extent to which they determine an informant’s recollections.
avoid any bias they have in relation to the historical period being investigated.

GOO,

What does the writer suggest about informants?

They may consciously be trying to please the historian.

Their objectivity is affected by a lack of historical perspective.

They select positive memories to form the basis of their accounts.
Their perceptions of the past are coloured by subsequent experiences.

GOO mp

2i

22

Paper 1 Reading

Animal Science

There are two main approaches to animal science — the physiological and the
‘whole animal’. Physiologists are mainly interested in how the body works, that
is, in how the nerves, muscles and sense organs are coordinated to produce
complex behaviour. Those taking the ‘whole animal’ approach, although they are
often interested in the mechanisms of behaviour, study the behaviour of the intact
animal and the factors that affect it.

Within the ‘whole animal’ approach, a distinction is often made between
psychologists and ethologists. Psychologists have traditionally worked in
laboratories on the learning abilities of a restricted range of species, mainly rats
and pigeons. Ethologists have been more concerned with the naturally occurring,
unlearnt behaviour of animals, often in their wild habitats. Although this
distinction still exists to some extent, there is now a fruitful coming together of
the two.

Among these types, it is the physiologists who like to emphasise that their
methods are the more fundamental. However, even if we knew how every nerve
cell operated in the performance of some pattern of behaviour, this would not
remove the need for us to study it at a behavioural level also. Behaviour has its
own organisation and its own units that we must use for its study. Trying to
describe the nest-building behaviour of a bird in terms of the actions of individual
nerve cells would be like trying to read a page of a book with a high-powered
microscope.

What point does the writer make about ethologists and psychologists?

A They want to retain existing definitions of their specialisms.
8 They have become equally cooperative.

€ They each work with different species.

DB They both study animals in the natural environment.

Through the example of the microscope, the writer implies that the physiological approach

has too narrow a focus.

over-emphasises behaviour.

makes exaggerated claims about itself.
ignores the way in which the nerve cells work.

OOo



=== Page 54 ===

Test 4

23

24

88

The Social Sciences

A problem facing all students who come to study a social science for the first time is
that they must do two things simultaneously. They must familiarise themselves with
the substance or content of their new subject and, at the same time, they must learn
the methodology of the subject. That is, they must become familiar not only with the
knowledge and research findings which fill the textbooks but also with the methods
by which the knowledge is obtained and organised, that is with the logical basis of the
subject itself. The two elements are not separate; they are very closely related. Because
we are ail familiar with social life through our everyday experiences we may feel that
the social sciences are very largely a matter of common-sense. But, as a look at any
textbook will quickly indicate, though each of the social sciences is concerned with
people in society, each discipline goes beyond common-sense understanding. Each
discipline focuses on a particular aspect of social life, each uses particular methods of
study and each employs its own set of concepts. It is this set of concepts, the most
basic ideas in a subject, which constitutes the ‘logical basis of the subject’, which enables
the social scientist to go beyond everyday common-sense and which distinguishes one
discipline from another.

What point does the writer make about the social sciences?

A They are conceptual rather than practical subjects.
B They are more complex than may be imagined.

C They share a common set of research techniques.
DB They are particularly accessible to the lay person.

in this paragraph the writer is

A introducing a subject.

B countering a criticism.

C defending his position.

B summing up his arguments.

Paper 1

Classical Architecture

To the classical world, that of Ancient Greece and Rome, architecture meant much
more than the mere construction of buildings. ‘Architecture’, says the Roman
architect Vitruvius, ‘consists of Order, and of Arrangement, and of Proportion and
Symmetry and Propriety and Distribution.’ For several of these terms he gives a
Greek equivalent: his definitions probably derived from an earlier Greek authority
whose writings are lost to us. Utility and Function are not part of this definition,
though in his book Vitruvius does go on to describe the best form and arrangements
for different purposes of structure; but here, at the beginning, the aesthetic emphasis,
architecture as an art, has priority. The origins of classical architecture are complex.
There was obviously a long prehistory of basic construction, of hut habitations simple
in form and material, both in Greece and Italy, which did not match up to Vitruvius’
artistic requirements. Though these were, by definition, inartistic they nevertheless
contributed an essential element of form, which persisted into the later sophisticated
architectural concepts. However ornate it may appear from the outside, in essence
the classical temple is a simple, single-roomed hut.

25 What does the writer suggest about Vitruvius?

A

B
c
D

His primary concern was the ultimate uses of buildings.
His thinking about art and architecture lacked originality.
He set high aesthetic standards in buildings.

He was more attracted to art than architecture.

26 What point is made about the classical tempie in the final sentence?

90>

lis form derives from an earlier style of construction.

It embodies an aesthetically pleasing architectural concept.

Its external decoration detracts from its artistic merit.

It is the highest achievement of Greek and Roman architecture.

Reading

89


=== Page 55 ===

Test 4

Part 3

You are going to read a magazine article. Seven paragraphs have been removed from the article.
Choose from the paragraphs A~H the one which fits each gap (27-33). There is one extra paragraph

which you do not need to use.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

Music — The Challenge Ahead

Technological advances continue to transform our lives at work, at home and in our
leisure activities. Susan Hallam discusses their impact on music in Britain.

in the latter part of the 20" century, we saw a
rapid increase in the opportunities availabie for
listening to music through radio, TV, records,
tapes, CDs, videos and a rapidly developing
range of multi-media techniques. Along with
this, there has been a decline in the
performance of live music and in the full-time
employment opportunities for professional
musicians.

Taking the idea behind such findings one step
further, current research is investigating to what
extent playing an instrument may even
encourage the development of transferable
skills. For instance, the need to practise
regularly may assist inthe acquisition of good
study habits and focused concentration; playing
in concerts may encourage habits of punctuality
and good organisation.

oa
z
ead

nay

Indeed, a society without music is surely
unthinkable and it seems that the issue is not
whether there will be music in the 21* century
but what the nature of that music will be; and
also whether there will be a continued perceived
need for people to learn to play musica
instruments.

In addition to its vocational significance, there is
a growing body of evidence that playing an
instrument may be beneficial to the
development of skills at an earlier stage.
Research in the USA has suggested that
listening to or actively making music has a direct
positive effect on spatial reasoning, one aspect
of the measurement of intelligence.

While there are many possible scenarios, |
believe that two possibilities are likely. Firstly,
the kinds of music to which people will listen will
become more diverse. New genres will develop
which will integrate different styies. Secondly,
there will be an increase in the use of technology
to compose and perform music. This will widen
access to composition as there will be less
reliance on technical skill but at the same time,

it is likely to further reduce the need for live ..

performance and musicians whose role is solely
related to it.

ree

If this vision of the future is to be realised, what
does the music profession need to do in
preparation? The focus of instrumental tuition
will need to change. Ways will need to be found
to enable more people to learn to play a range
of instruments, throughout their life span.

Paper1 Reading

uae
ae
er

a

Crucial to the success of the process will be the
training of musicians. They will need to be able
to motivate, inspire and teach learners of all
ages, develop skills for working with large and
diverse groups and acquire the communication,
social, entrepreneurial and management skills
necessary for community work.

Finally, we need to sirive towards raising the
profile of music itself. Music plays a crucial role
in our lives but all too often it is taken for
granted. Those involved in the music profession
at all levels need to work actively together to
ensure that this changes.

A As a result, the impact on the instrumental
curriculum and the measures used to assess
progress through it will be such that they will
need to adapt to maintain their relevance for
a broader sector of the population. Ultimately,
they will need to encompass a wider range of
musical skills.

B For all these reasons, there is likely to be a
continuing demand for instrumental teaching
in the short term. What about the longer term
picture? Is there likely to be a shift in focus
and, if so, what direction will it take?

C | would respond to the latter question on a
positive note. The music industry is one of the
major generators of income in Britain and
musical skill and talent will continue to be
important in preparing individuals to work in a
variety of professions, in particular those
related to the media.

D This represents a fundamental change from
traditional practice and it will be accompanied
by the need to respond to demands for public
accountability. Viewed positively, this should
provide an opportunity for all those involved
in music education to demonstrate the high
quality of music tuition available.

E There seems little doubt that the widening
access to music is likely to continue, fulfilling
as it does so many human needs. On a
nationai level, no major state occasion is
without music. For individuals, it provides
opportunities for numerous activities, formal
and informal.

F One of the best-recognised functions is that
of providing an outlet for emotional
expression. lis influence on our moods can
be therapeutic. It provides a means of com-
municating which goes beyond words and
provides us with shared unspoken
understandings. :

G Developing in parallel with this trend is a likely

increase in the number of people, across the
whole age range, who wish to actively
participate in music making. Such activities
are likely to be community based and will
reflect the musical traditions of that
community whatever they may be.

H While these resuits are still to be successfully
replicated, other data from Europe has
indicated that an increase in group music
lessons can have positive effects on social
relationships in school and on concentration
in young children and those with behavioural
difficulties.



=== Page 56 ===

Test 4

Part 4

You are going to read an extract from a novel. For questions 34-40, choose the answer (A, B, C
or B) which you think fits best according io the text.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

92.

‘You don’t take sugar, do you?’ shouted his secretary, not so much asking a question as
stating a fact — as well she might, because she had been making Lancelot cups of coffee
for many months. Her excuse for forgetting such things was that he wasn’t normally
supposed to be there. Actually nowadays he was usually there all the time, having
discovered that to take up his proprietorial privilege of staying away was tantamount
to opening the floodgates. Not for the first time he pondered the easy, imperceptibly
divided stages by which he had progressed from valued counsellor, meeting authors
and playwrights over lunch at carefully planned planning meetings complete with
agenda, to hapless dogsbody moving one step ahead of catastrophe, with nowhere to
park when he arrived at work in the mornings.

‘This came,’ she yelled, vaguely waving a manila folder before putting it down in
front of him. ‘From that chap in Los Angeles. You said you wanted to see it.’ A typed
label said: ‘A World History of the Short, by Ian Cuthbert.’ Just under that it said ‘An
Expanded Synopsis’. Lancelot did not want to see that word ‘synopsis’. At the very least
he wanted to see a label saying ‘A First Draft’. Lancelot had already seen a synopsis of
this book and did not really want to see another, however heavily revised. Ian Cuthbert
had been given an advance of several thousands of pounds for this book during the
initial flurry of activity when Lancelot had bought the firm. One of several old friends
from whom Lancelot had made the capital error of commissioning books, lan Cuthbert
was a particularly flagrant proof that in such circumstances the possessor of a wayward
temperament, far from nerving himself to behave more predictably for friendship’s
sake, will actually become less ‘pindownable’ than ever.

Lancelot skipped the blurb come preamble which he had read for what seemed like
the hundredth time and sampled the synopsis proper. There was scarcely a phrase that
he did not recognise at a glance. He closed the folder and shifted it to one side. Plainly
at this rate Ian’s manuscript would never be forthcoming. As well as almost wholly
lacking the brilliance for which its author was supposed to be famous, the synopsis,
under its doggedly frolicsome tone, had the unmistakable dead ring of a lost conviction.
Lancelot remembered tales of a famous author-about-town whose last book, published
incomplete after his death, had been coaxed from him chapter by chapter, one payment
at a time. But in that case, the payments were fractions of a hypothetical advance which
had never been given in the first place. Ian’s advance had been enormous; a blatant
reversal of the sound business principle by which authors must deliver a manuscript
now in order to be paid with inflated currency later.

line 18
line 19
line 20
line 21

34

35

Paper 1

Lancelot, who had read modern languages at Oxford, could remember the day when
Ian Cuthbert had been the most promising talent in a Cambridge so full of promise that
it had made everywhere else feel provincial. lan’s contemporaries had plotted to take
over the British theatre and in a remarkably short time they had actually done so. But
their mental energy nad seemed like indolence when you looked at Ian. He had worn
his overcoat like a cape and talked about what one very famous French writer had said
as if he had been there to overhear it. Yet for some reason, the whole frostily coruscating
galaxy of Ian’s creative intellect had remained locked in its closet. While less gifted
deviants came out and conquered, Ian went further in. At the height of his influence as
a literary taste-maker he was already notoriously difficult to deal with. Officially
appointed by the relevant public agency to edit a comprehensive magazine of the arts,
he was like a general with a million tons of equipment pinned down on the beach by
nothing except an excess of opportunity. The magazine used up the budget for a dozen
issues without appearing once. Similarly, his thrice-renewed three-year contract with
one of the fashion magazines engendered little except legends about the size of his
emolument, which was increased from generosity to extravagance in an attempt to
make him produce more, and then from extravagance to munificence in an attempt to
make him produce anything. At the editorial working breakfasts — there were always
at least two of the titled photographers present to capture the scene for posterity — lan
spat witty venom through clenched teeth, and poured nitric acid on other people’s
ideas. Ten years later, he could scarcely be depended upon to turn up for his own
funeral. Lancelot was on the verge of admitting to himself that ‘A World History of the
Short’ had been a mistake from its inception.

What does the reader learn about Lancelot in the first paragrapn?

A He regrets having delegated important work to his secretary.
B His business no longer runs as smoothly as it used to.

C He prefers entertaining clients to doing routine office work.
D His schedule is always tightly packed with appointments.

Which phrase, as it is used in the text, has a double meaning in the context of Lancelot’s

business initiatives?

‘flurry of activity’ (ine 18)

‘capital error’ (line 19)

‘flagrant proof (line 20)

‘wayward temperament’ (lines 20~21)

GO Om

Reading

93



=== Page 57 ===

Test 4

36

37

38

39

40

According to the writer, how did Lancelot feel about lan when he first commissioned him?

A He was aware that he was doing lan a much-needed favour.

B_ He believed that his friendship with lan would develop further.

G He suspected that he might have misjudged lan’s behaviour.

D_ He trusted that lan would meet the requirements of the agreement.

How does Lancelot react to the ‘synopsis’ he has received from lan?

A He is amazed to find that it contains no original thoughts or ideas.

B He has the impression that lan is not taking the project seriously.

© He is convinced that lan has other more pressing commitments.

D_ He realises that lan’s inflexibility restricts him to a certain writing style.

In recalling the story of another well-known author, Lancelot realises that

A money is not a motivating factor for peopie who are already famous.
B money can have a negative impact on relationships with others.

€ he should have known better than to pay lan when he did.

D he should have consulted others before making a deal with lan.

What aspect of lan’s student days does Lancelot find hard to reconcile with his more recent
experience of lan?

lan’s relationships with famous writers of that time

the large number of lan’s peers who went into the theatre
the fact that lan outshone a highly talented peer group
lan’s detachment from his artistic contemporaries

COG

In comparing lan’s early career days to the experience of a general at war, the writer is
suggesting that lan

A might have benefited from a more restricted range of choices.
B might have done better in a different environment.

€ was allowed to get away with too many misdemeanours.

D should have taken a more strategic approach to his work.

Paper 2 Writing
PAPER 2 WRITING (2 hours)

Part i

You must answer this question. Write your answer in 300-350 words in an appropriate style.

1 Plans have been put forward to build a fast food restaurant in the historic centre of a town you
know. Many local residents have expressed their disapproval:

6 . . 9
This means there will be even more traffic in the town!

@ §
it wil spoil the old-world characier of the place.

“People come here to escape places like fast food restaurants,
so many people will stop coming here.

However, you and other residents believe it will encourage more visitors to the town, increase
revenue, and generate an interest in local history. You decide to send a proposal to the local
council in which you say why you think the plans should be implemented.

Write your proposai.

95



=== Page 58 ===

Test 4

Part 2

Write an answer to one of the questions 2—5 in this part. Write your answer in 300-350 words in an
appropriate style.

2 You have recently returned from an adventure holiday with a group of students from your class,
and you have been asked to write a review of your holiday for your college magazine. in your
review, say why you would recommend it for a group of students who want a cheap but exciting
holiday with opportunities for exploring interesting places, meeting different people, and
experiencing a different lifestyle.

Write your review.

3 The Minister of Education is inviting people to send in proposals on various ways of improving
education in their country. You decide to send in your ideas on the matter.
Write your proposal.

4 You read the ° following invitation in a magazine:

Y Readers are invited to submit articles entitled ‘I’ve always wa wanted to learn “how to ...’. Is there {>

a skill that you have always wanted to learn? Write and tell us what your ambition i is, | what
attracts you about this skill, and what you would do with this skill when you have learned it.

"one Sar ne reer snag ference gee

EL ae gare

You decide to send in an article.
Write your article.

§ Based on your reading of one of these books, write on one of the following.

(a) Anne Tyler: The Accidental Tourist
A library is about to have an exhibition of books entitled ‘Children in Twentieth Century
Literature’. It has asked its readers for recommendations. Write a letter to the librarian
recommending The Accidental Tourist as a possible book to appear in the exhibition. You
should focus on Alexander and his relationship with his mother, Muriel, and with Macon.

Write your letter. Do not write any postal addresses.

(b) John Wyndham: The Day of the Triffids
The Drama Department of your college wants to make a video version of a story which is
not only about dramatic events but also about human relationships. The producer has
asked you to write a report on The Day of the Triffids in which you outline the dramatic
events in the story, and describe their impact on the characters.

Write your report.

(ce) Graham Greene: Our Man in Havana
A literary magazine is inviting readers to contribute articles on the way writers explore the
relationship between different characters. You decide to write an article on Our Man in
Havana showing how the relationship between Wormold and Dr Hasselbacher develops.

Write your article.

96

Paper 2 Writing



=== Page 59 ===

Test 4
PAPER 3 USE OF ENGLISH (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1

For questions 1-15, read the text below and think of the word which best fits each space. Use only
one word in each space. There is an example at the beginning (0).

Write your answers in CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet.

Example: | 0 W)H]E] N LL Ty |

History of music

Lovers of music who are a little rusty (0) Wen. it comes to history shouldn’t miss forthcoming

issues of this magazine. In our most ambitious series of articles (1) .. date, we aim to span

the history of western music in (2) .......... entirety. Obviously, (3) .......... the lack of space at our
disposal, we cannot be totally comprehensive (4) .......... we do feel we have a (5) .......... than
adequate overview of the socio-cultural context. If you’re already feeling (6) .......... off by the
prospect of a rather dry history lesson, then | must stress how unlike a lesson these articles will
be. (7) wn. the extent to which you might be familiar (8) .......... the historical background, you

must read these articles for the insight they give (9) .......... the music itself.

In (10) a. to this, the series will represent a guide for readers whose aim is to build an essential
music collection. Now (#1) .......... this strike you (42) .......... yet another voyage through familiar
territory, then you may be in for some surprises, because our expert writers are nothing if (13)..........
unpredictable. in view of the reputation of those involved, (74) .......... thing is guaranteed — the
music chosen to illustrate their histories will be (15) .......... from run-of-the-mill.

Paper 3 Use of English

Part 2
For questions 16-25, read the text below. Use the word given in capitals at the end of some of
the lines to form a word that fits in the space in the same line. There is an example at the
beginning (0).

Write your answers in CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet.

Example: |0|/UJN|DIE|JRIG/OINJE

The image of science

The image that we have of science has (0) .Wndergoné.. radical change GO

in the last hundred years. An enormous (76) .......... explosion, together witha TECHNOLOGY
number of very real (17) .......... about the environment and all the moral and ANXIOUS
political ramifications of economic growth have (78) .......... put science atthe QUESTION

centre of public debate.

The twentieth century began with a challenge to the (19) .......... that human ASSUME
knowledge was approaching completion. It will come, perhaps, as something

of a surprise to all of us to realise that the emergence of this highly (20) .......... DESTROY
process came both from within and outside science.

New scientific theories (21) .......... reveal the limitations of the old perspective. OVERWHELM
We had thought that the world, understood through the medium of rational

(22) v. , was, indeed, the real world. Now we know that this was no more BE

than a simplification that just happened to work. Once we realise this, though,

we can move in a number of opposing directions. We can re-evaluate all

knowledge (23) .......... and decide that it is eternally fragmentary and fullofa PESSIMISM
vast number of (24) .......... , Or we can be more positive and view ihese vast PERFECTION
explosions of scientific awareness as new challenges still to come and as

celebrations of the (25) .......... that the human imagination has so far scaled. HIGH


=== Page 60 ===

Test 4

Part 3

For questions 26-31, think of one word only which can be used appropriately in all three
sentences. Here is an example (0).
Example:

© Some of the tourists are hoping to get compensation for the poor state of the hotel, and | think
they NAVE B VETY oo. csscessesesecteseesesease case.

There’s no point in trying to wade across the river, the current iS far 100 0. cece»

If you’re asking me which of the candidates should get the job, I’m afraid | don’t have any
seecseesesteneenenseavensenesseseees views either way.

[o|[s|t[R[O[N|G

Write only the missing word in CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet.

26 His uncle’s resignation... the way for Tom to take-over the business.
SUSAN oo eeesteesseererenseesees a shelf to make room for the books she had recently bought.
As a result of new evidence produced in court today, Smith was wo... eee of all
blame.

27 The old house had been neglected and was in a deplorable 0... «

Until the 18" century, Scotland was an independent 0... eee with its own system
of government.

In many countries, the local authorities rather than the .....
for maintaining roads, schools and hospitals.

.. are responsible

28 | find it difficult t0 eee Myself deadlines because | need some flexibility in my

work.
My brother wees up a new business last year, and it’s really taken off.
My favourite poem has DEEN wesc to music and sounds beautiful as a song.

100

29

30

31

Paper 3 Use of English

Despite assurances from the tour company’s local representatives, the stranded
Holiday MAKES 0... -ceseseessecsesseeeeeeseees unconvinced by the reasons given for the cancellation of
their flight.

Does anything ... . of the castle’s original furnishings, or have all these items
been brought in from elsewhere?

Now that the farewell concert has taken place, only the group’s financial affairs
seeeeesentsneeneeessssacneateeves to be wound up.

Polly NaS wees an enormous amount in travelling expenses following her trip
to the USA.

My BOSS NaS oo... ce eseeeseseeteeeene to be a direct descendant of the famous explorer.

The bank’s Collapse ........ ee eeseseeterenenee many victims in the city’s financial institutions.
When she goes out too much, Samantha starts tO wees behind with her
homework.

The magazines on the market tend to... eee into three main groups.
Following the opening of a rival nightclub, Cinderella’s has begun tO oe out

of favour with the city’s young people.

101



=== Page 61 ===

Test 4

Part 4

For questions 32-39, complete the second sentence so that it has a similar meaning to the first
sentence, using the word given. Do not change the word given. You must use between three

and eight words, including the word given.
Here is an example (0).

Exampie:
0 Do you mind if | watch you while you paint?
objection

DO YOU vveesesssessesssessseessesseessnsenecsneessecsnecsseceneccanecsnecsuseenecsaneesnessnnesneennessy you while you paint?

Write only the missing words on the separate answer sheet.

32 Paul's son was driving the car when the accident happened.
time

The car was .. of the accident.

33. It was Nick’s advice that saved me from bankruptcy.
it
HAD oo ccececcescececceeceesneensesesssessessceusesesssessssssssesesssseseesersnssneessesneaenssenaes have gone bankrupt.

34 The police never actually accused Thomas of committing a crime.

point

35 Neither of these carpets is any better than the other.
choose

THELE’S NOE oc ccceecceeseeeeeescseseseeeseeeeetecscsecncnessassensessnssesseseaneneasiasensesenteres these two carpets.

102

.. Thomas of committing a crime.

36

37

38

39

Paper 3 Use of English

You are absolutely forbidden to smoke anywhere in the factory.
total

There .... srt. anywhere in the factory.

Jenny doesn’t mind whether she comes to London on either Monday or Tuesday.

ho

Wh eeceesseesstcsssecssessnesasecseessusesusesusenneesucsuacsusssssessssesuseseecsnessseeseeesneesece whether she comes to London
on Monday or Tuesday.

Did the football team play any better last weekend?
in

WAS there ANY ones cecsssesssssecssnscessecersnsessnescesnsessuseessucsssesessessssessasesssnecesseesseveese last weekend?

In particular, the school library was criticised by the inspectors because of its poor lighting.

singled

The inspectors
poor lighting.

... because of its

103



=== Page 62 ===

Test 4

Pari 5

For questions 40-44, read the following texts on technological change. For questions 40-43,
answer with a word or short phrase. You do not need to write complete sentences. For question
44, write a summary according to the instructions given.

Write your answers to questions 40-44 on the separate answer sheet.

40

41

104

History is full of predictions that new machines will cause mass unemployment. In
Britain in the early 19" century, a group called the Luddites smashed the new
machinery that they perceived as threatening their livelihood. Similarly, in the 1930s,
factory automation was blamed for high unemployment. And now doom-mongers
are again predicting a jobless future as robots and computers take over. Even those
lucky enough to hang on to a job will, they say, face insecurity and low wages.

If history is any guide, however, they are wrong. Over the past two centuries of huge
technological advances, employment and real incomes in rich industrial countries
have risen almost continuously and living standards have risen because of
technological change, not in spite of it. Some of the world’s most technologically
advanced societies also have some of the lowest jobless rates. But modern-day
Luddites remain undaunted, predicting that by the middle of the 21" century,
hundreds of millions of workers will be left permanently idle.

It is true that millions of jobs will be destroyed by technology, just as they have been
over the past two hundred years. But in the past, those job losses have always been
offset by job gains, so total employment has continued to grow along with the
population. As blacksmiths and coachmen disappeared, car mechanics and salesmen
took their place. Technology changed the types of jobs on offer, but the volume

continued to grow. We can expect the same pattern to be repeated in the future. line 19

Which phrase in the first paragraph tells us the writer's view of the ‘modern-day Luddites’
he talks about in paragraph 2?

In your own words, explain what the writer is referring to in the phrase ‘the same patiern’ in
line 19.

Paper 3 Use of English

My friend Bill had a reel-to-reel video tape-recorder in the days before anyone imagined that
VCRs would become a mainstream consumer appliance. He lusted after a personal computer
in 1978, before most people even knew they existed. Now, he runs a Web-based news service
and spends his days learning up-to-the-minute ‘whizzeries’. Given this, you’d expect Bill to be
the type of person who’s always telling you how your latest piece of equipment has already
been superseded, or that your whole way of life is going to be totally changed by the next
round of innovations. But you'd be wrong. On the wall of his office, Bill has a large paper
calendar, which he uses to track all his appointments. It’s convenient, he says, and he can see
at a glance what he’s supposed to be doing on any given day. He writes on it in pencil so that
it’s easy to change.

Bill is, lam convinced, typical. Despite the way people talk about technological change, despite
all the outlandish predictions about how it will completely change our way of life, certain things
have a habit of staying much the same. In truth, new technologies rarely replace older ones
completely: movies and radio weren't killed off by television, and pens and pencils are stil!
valuable despite word processors. | bet just about everyone has somewhere a piece of
obsolete technology, like Bill’s calendar, kept either because it is comforting or because it does
a job so extremely well that there’s nothing to be gained by changing it.

42 Which word elsewhere in the first paragraph repeats the idea of ‘whizzeries’ in line 4?

43 In your own words, explain why we may be surprised to learn about Bill’s calendar.

line 4

44 ina paragraph of between 50 and 70 words, summarise in your own words as far as
possible the ways in which, according to the two texts, people’s predictions about

technological change can be wrong. Write your summary on the separate answer sheet.

105



=== Page 63 ===

Test 4
PAPER 4 LISTENING (40 minutes approximately)

Part 1

You will hear four different extracts. For questions 1-8, choose the answer (A, B or ©) which fits
best according to what you hear. There are two questions for each extract.

You hear part of a radio programme on classical music.

1 What was Carl Ruggles’ attitude towards other composers?

A jealous
B resentful
C dismissive

2 What is the speaker doing when he speaks?

A summarising a musical trend
B providing a link for broadcast items
C reviewing a new recording

You hear part of a radio review of a French novel which has recently been translated into English.

3 The reviewer describes the babysitter in the novel as

A unreasonable.
B irresponsible.
C inexperienced.

4 The reviewer finds the translation of the novel unsatisfactory because

A itis difficult to relate to the characters.
B the concerns of the characters are uninteresting.
C_ ihe friendship between the characters is implausible.

106

Paper 4

te

You hear part of a radio programme in which a sociologist talks about bags.

§ The speaker thinks that bags are significant because

A they are an essential accessory.
B they protect the sensitive parts of our bodies.
€ they represent a link between different areas of our bodies.

6 The speaker's purpose in discussing the expression ‘to give someone the sack’ is

A to show that bags can signify quite contradictory concepts.
B to exemplify how language can be misused.
€ to demonstrate that the symbolism of bags crosses cultures.

You hear two friends talking about modern films.

7 What view of the film industry do both speakers share?
A Studios spend too much on films.
B_ Film plots are predictable.
C Cinema audiences are more discerning.
8 According to the speakers, why are the facts in true stories changed for films?

A The film makers could be sued.

Listening

B The facts may not lend themselves to being filmed.
Cc The facts could be difficult to establish.



=== Page 64 ===

Test 4

Part 2

You will hear a scientist talking about his first visit to the Antarctic. For questions 8-17, complete
the sentences with a word or short phrase.

Richard had to undergo a survival course known as

io get used to Antarctic conditions.

After his survival course, Richard was to live in a

aaa

| on sea ice.

There was evidence of activity from a

ae
| a near where the course was held.
a

From the area where the course took place a

42 stretches to the South Pole.

a
The failure of Richard’s team to construct a
eeceeener
| !;43.) meant that their shelter was incomplete.
[ete aaaa|
At base camp there are 4 :

as well as possibilities for shopping and entertainment.

People at base camp are said to be willing to pay as much as a

In the hut used by the explorers Shackleton and Scott, you can see some

Richard’s team was named the

108

| for a portion of salad greens.

which belonged to them.

by their course leader.

Paper 4 Listening

Part 3

You will hear part of a radio interview with a social worker. For questions 18-22, choose the answer
(A, B, © or BD) which fits best according to what you hear.

18 What motivated Tim Jarman to change his career path?

He was keen to give expert advice to his colleagues.

He felt he should experience difficult conditions at first hand.
He was willing to accept money from a charity.

He thought it would help his academic career in the long run.

ce
ie

2

Ee

0O 8

19 According to Tim, setting up the Northdown Project invoived

responding to suggestions from the community.
organising educational activities for children. a
liaising closely with the local authorities. Hel
establishing relationships with existing youth clubs.

COW.

20 What did Tim feel was a crucial factor in the success of the project?

A variety of sports facilities was provided.
Adults were available to help with supervision.
The accommodation was ideal for the project.
Teenagers were allowed their own freedom.

00>

21 In Tim's view, what influence did the Northdown Project have on most of the young people
who participated in it?

it encouraged them to take up worthwhile jobs.

It showed them the importance of voluntary work.

It helped them to lead law-abiding lives.

It offered them the opportunity to meet the right partner.

oOo Kp

22 According to Tim, there are unlikely to be more projects like the Northdown one in the near
future because

A the need for such projects is declining.

B community projects are difficult to set up and fund.
€ the current trend is for short-term projects.

B community groups are not interested in cooperating.

109



=== Page 65 ===

Test 4 Paper 5 Speaking

Part 4 PAPER 5 SPEAKING
; a (19 minutes for pairs of candidates, 28 minutes for groups of three)
You will hear part of a conversation in which two neighbours, Mary and Frank, are discussing
current developments in museums. For questions 23-28, decide whether the opinions are This test is also suitable for groups of three students; this only occurs at the last test of a session
expressed by only one of the speakers, or whether the speakers agree. . where a centre has an uneven number of candidates.

There are two examiners. One (the interlocutor) conducts the test, providing you with the necessary

Write MM for Mary,
i materials and explaining what you have to do. The other examiner (the Assessor) will be introduced

F for Frank,
or B for Both, where they agree. to you, but then takes no further part in the interaction.
Part 1 (3 minutes for pairs of candidates, 4 minutes for groups of three)
23 The learning process, in general, can be enjoyable. : The Interlocutor first asks you and your partner(s) a few questions which focus on information about

yourselves and personal opinions.

24 It's a good idea to prepare children for a museum visit. Part 2 (4 minutes for pairs of candidates, 6 minutes for groups of three)

In this part of the test you and your partner(s) are asked to talk together. The interlocutor places
a single picture or a set of pictures on the table in front of you. This stimulus provides the basis for
a discussion. The Interlocutor first asks an introductory question which focuses on one or two of
the pictures. After about a minute (or two for groups of three), the Interlocutor gives you both/all a
decision-making task based on the same set of pictures.

The picture for Part 2 is on pages C8-C9 of the colour section.

25 Entry to museums should be free so that everybody can take advantage of
them. :

26 Public libraries perform a similar function to museums.
Part 3 (12 minutes for pairs of candidates, 18 minutes for groups of three)

You are each given the opportunity to talk for two minutes, to comment after your partner has
spoken and to take part in a more general discussion.

The Interlocutor gives you a card with a question written on it and asks you to talk about it for
two minutes. After you have spoken, your partner is first asked to comment and then the
Interlocutor asks you both another question related to the topic on the card. This procedure is
repeated, so that your partner receives a card and speaks for two minutes, you are given an
opportunity to commen and a follow-up question is asked. For a group of three, there is a third
card and the procedure is repeated once more.

Finally, the Interlocutor asks some further questions, which leads to a discussion on a general
theme related to the subjects already covered in Part 3.

The cards for Part 3 are on pages C10-C12 of the colour section.

27 Lending out exhibits is beneficial to the wider public.

28 The architecture of a museum affects how | view the collection.

110 111



=== Page 66 ===

Test 1 Key

Paper 1 Reading (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)

1B 2A 3D 4A §C 6B 7B 8A
10 C 11D 1A 13 A 4C 15 B 16 A
17D 18 A

9D

Part 2. (two marks for each correct answer)
19 B 20 C 21C 22 D 23C 24 D 25 C 26 B

Part 3 (two marks for each correct answer)
27 G 28 B 29 F 30 E 31 D 32 C 33 A

Part 4 (two marks for each correct answer)
34 B 35 A 36 D 37 C 38 B 39 A 40 C

Paper 2 Writing (2 hours)
Task-specific mark schemes

Question 1: Escape to the country

Content

Major points:

Discussion of — problems of city life
— advantages of country life
— problems of country life

Further points:
Any points relevant to the area of discussion.

Range
Language for expressing and supporting opinions.

Appropriacy of register and format
Register appropriate to an article for a magazine. Article may make use of
headings.

Organisation and cohesion

Clear development of arguments and ideas. Adequate use of linking and
paragraphing.

Target reader

Would understand the writer’s viewpoint.

112

Test 1 Key

Question 2: Launching a new soft drink

Content

Description and discussion of the different methods for advertising the soft drink,
with reference to the ideas provided, and explanation as to why the writer’s ideas
are particularly effective.

Range
Language for describing, analysing, explaining and making recommendations.

Appropriacy of register and format

Register and format appropriate for that of a proposal ~ could make use of
relevant section headings. Register can be formal or neutral in tone, but must be
consistent.

Organisation and cohesion

Presentation of ideas and information should be well-structured. Adequate use of
linking and paragraphing.

Target reader

The company would have a clear idea of what is being recommended.

Question 3: International Festival of Drama Review
Content

Review of the drama festival and comment on what they learned from the
experience.

Range

Language of description, analysis and evaluation.

Appropriacy of register and format

Register and format should be appropriate for a review in a school/college
magazine. Register can be formal/informal, but must be consistent.

Organisation and cohesion
Clear development of points. Adequate use of paragraphing and linking.

Target reader
Would be informed about the drama festival and what the writer learned from the
experience.

Question 4: College handbook for new students

Content

Letter should give information about the college and the social organisations, and
make new students feel welcome.

Range

Language for giving information.

Appropriacy of register and format

Informal/neutral, but must be consistent.

Should be encouraging and lively in tone, friendly and welcoming.

113



=== Page 67 ===

Test 1 Key

Organisation and cohesion
Well-organised, possibly with sub-headings.

Target reader
Would be well-informed about what is available at the college.

Question S(a): The Accidental Tourist

Content

Clear reference to the book chosen. ;
Brief summary of the book leading to an analysis of the funny and sad elements in
the story.

Range
Language of description, narration and evaluation.

Appropriacy of register and format
Review with register and format appropriate to a student magazine. Register must
be consistent throughout.

Organisation and cohesion
Clear development from introduction to development of the main focus, leading to
a clear conclusion.

Target reader
Would be informed about the book and appreciate both the funny and sad
elernents of the story.

Question 5(b): The Day of the Triffids

Content

Clear reference to the book chosen.

Description of the triffids and what they do, and discussion of their impact on
society.

Range

Language of description, narration, analysis and evaluation.

Appropriacy of register and format

Neutral composition.

Organisation and cohesion

Clear presentation and development of ideas. Appropriate paragraphing and
linking. Clear conclusion.

Target reader
Would be informed about the triffids and understand their role in the book.

Question 5(c): Our Man in Havana

Content

Close reference to the book chosen.

Clear focus on whether or not Wormold achieves the status of a hero.

Test 1 Key

Range
Language of description, narration and evaluation.

Appropriacy of register and format
Formal register, and format consistent and appropriate for a letter to a literary
magazine.

Organisation and cohesion

Clear presentation and development of ideas, with appropriate linking and
paragraphing. Clear conclusion.

Target reader

Would have a clear idea of the writer’s viewpoint with regard to whether or not
Wormold achieves the status of a hero.

Paper3 Use of English (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)

1 back 2 part 3 it 4 there 5 against / to 6 little
7 brought 8 until / till 9 that 10 to 11 went

12 would / could / might 13 means 14 hardly / scarcely

15 so/as/ that

Part 2 (one mark for each correct answer)

16 invariably 17 pressure 18 excessive 19 essential
20 retailers 21 centrally 22 illogical 23 unavoidable
24 criticism(s) 25 efficiency

Part 3 (two marks for each correct answer)
26 matter 27 flat 28 fell 29 beat 30 led 31 press

Part 4 (one mark for each correct section)

32 no (previous) time (before) (1) + has the present government (ever) (1)

33 is / seems to be (rather / somewhat) lacking (in) (1) + clarity / cohesion (1)

34 not to (1) + take sides (1)

35 to meet (1) + anyone / anybody / someone / somebody (who is) more generous
than OR + a more generous person than (1)

36 reveal / manifest / show / display / demonstrate / have the slightest hesitation in
OR hesitate in the slightest (1)
+ when it came to OR before / about (1)

37 (had) never crossed (1) + my mind (1)

38 (the reason) why Liz (should have) left / departed (1) + (so) suddenly (1)

39 had (finally) run (1) + out of (1)

Part 5 (questions 40-43 two marks for each correct answer)
40 analogy of market place particularly appropriate in a business text



=== Page 68 ===

Test 1 Key

41 they are arrived at by chance or are a reflection of the personality of the person
in charge of the company
42 their personal goals coincide with company goals so they can work on both at
the same time
43 workers are not permitted to develop and implement their own ideas for
improvement, thus restricting company development
no group vision
44 (one mark for each content point, up to ten marks for summary skills)
The paragraph should include the following points:
i both need to be in good shape / have level of fitness
ii require mental determination to succeed
iii perform better as a team
iv need to raise the level of objectives when they are approached so that
progress continues to be made / reassess their goals continually

Paper 4 Listening (40 minutes approximately)

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)
TA 2B 3B 4B 5 Cc 6A 7A 8B

Part 2 (one mark for each correct answer)

9 transporting goods 10 (welcome) shelter 11 copper
12 ice(-)dance / ice(-)dancing 13 air(-)conditioning / air conditioners
14 spray 15 logo(s) 16 20/ twenty hours 17 fog

Part 3 (one mark for each correct answer)
i8 B 19 C 20 A 21D 22.C

Part 4 (one mark for each correct answer)
23 B 24 A 25 A 26 C 27 B 28 C

Transcript Certificate of Proficiency in English Listening Test. Test 1.
I’m going to give you the instructions for this test.

Pll introduce each part of the test and give you time to look at
the questions.

At the start of each piece you'll bear this sound:
tone
You'll hear each piece twice.

Remember, while you're listening, write your answers on the
question paper.

You'll have five minutes at the end of the test to copy your
answers onto the separate answer sheet.

116

Extract 1

Presenter:

Actor:

Presenter:

Actor:

Extract 2

Test 1 Key

There will now be a pause. You must ask any questions now, because you
must not speak during the test.

[pause]

Now open your question paper and look at Part One.

[pause]

You'll hear four different extracts. For questions 1 to 8, choose the answer
(A, B or C) which fits best according to what you hear. There are two
questions for each extract.

[pause]
tone

Do you have to do all these interviews to publicise the film, Tom? Is it in your
contract?

No, but | feel it’s part of my responsibility to advertise it. Having done a few low-
budget films that come out for a week and then disappear, it’s really disappointing.
So you go on and do the !oca! radio so that people come and see it, especially if
it's something that you're proud of. | think you often find that if an actor isn’t
prepared to do an interview, it’s more often than not because they're not happy
with themselves or the product.

Sometimes with the big stars there’s this long list of things we’re not allowed to
ask them about!

That’s not fair, is it? If they say they’re going to do the interview, then they should.
If you were to ask me an incredibly awkward question, | could just say, ‘Well, |
don’t want to talk about that’. But as | say, I’m here to plug the film! | mean, I’m not
here to make myself a big celebrity or anything. That’s what. . .

[pause]
tone
[The recording is repeated.}

[pause]

[pause]
tone

How would you describe your personality? Anxious? Outgoing? The list could be
quite long. In fact, psychologists have found approaching 18,000 words to
describe personality. If so much of our language is given over to this activity, then
the description of personality must be an important part of everyday life. But
perhaps we are influenced in the way we judge another's character by our general
liking or disliking for them. A beloved uncle is eccentric, whereas a more
unpopular one is mad. So clearly there are advantages to the scientific study of
personality.

As one interesting example of what's been discovered, take extroversion and
introversion. Extroversion means being very outward-looking, sociable, noisy, and
introversion is the opposite. Originally, it was thought that people fell into one or

117



=== Page 69 ===

Test 1 Key

Extract 3

Extract 4

interviewer:
Author:

other of these two groups. But now ail studies of personality show that they are
not separate categories, but represent the two extremes of a continuum, and that
in fact most people are somewhere in the middle.

[pause]

tone

[The recording is repeated.] PART 2

[pause]
[pause]
tone

When | think of my childhood home now, it seems that its beauty is protected by
its remoteness and that very remoteness made me want not so much to leave, but
escape. The corner of Scotland | come from is a peninsula cut off from the rest of
Scotland by the sea and the stark emptiness of the moors.

Last summer | went home and tried insanely to buy a house. I’d been nurturing
this idea for some time. The moment I set eyes on the house, | knew it was for
me, as though the hand of destiny had guided me down the track.

What was | thinking? — | had no livelihood there. | was a foreign correspondent
whose only specialism was international! affairs. My ‘home’ and everything | knew
best was in London. The house was built of granite and seemed to grow
organically from the rock, as though it was part of the natural topography. It was
timeless, unchanging, predictable and certain, just what | was seeking. | made an
offer on it, which wasn’t accepted. | was saved from my own sentimental folly.

[pause]
tone
[The recording is repeated.]

[pause]

[pause]

tone

So, why did you decide to write this book on the USA now?

Well a few years ago, when | was there, | was asked to write a book about it; and |
must have spent at least four or five minutes contemplating this exercise. The
States is more like a world than a country; you could as well write a book about
people, or about life. There’s so much material — it’s all embracing. Then, years
later, as | was emptying out my desk drawers to gather together a selection of
past pieces I’d written, | found that I'd already written a book about the US, but it
was unpremeditated, accidental, and in instalments. Of ihe hundreds of thousands
of words i seem to have written for newspapers and magazines in the last fifteen
years, about half of them seem to be about the US. But | hope these disparate
pieces add up to something. | know you can approach the subject only if you
come at it from at least a dozen different directions.

[pause]

Test 1 Key

tone
[The recording is repeated.]
That’s the end of Part One.

Now turn to Part Two.

[pause]

You will hear part of a radio programme about ice-skating rinks. For
questions 9 to 17, complete the sentences with a word or short phrase.

You now have forty-five seconds in which to look at Part Two.
{pause]
tone

lf you’ve ever been to watch any of Britain’s professional ice-hockey teams,
you've no doubt thrilled at the speed and agility of great athletes skating on indoor
ice. But you’ve probably taken for granted the surface that makes it all possible.
Nevertheless, the temperature and other characteristics of the surface can make
ihe difference between a championship-winning performance and an
embarrassing spill. Indoor ice rinks are used for all sorts of sports and recreational
activities, in all of which the quality of the ice makes a big difference.

Ice-skating began as a means of transporting goods on the frozen rivers and
canals throughout northern Europe long before anyone ever saw it as the
recreational activity which it later became. Considering that skating for pleasure
was done outdoors in the freezing winter weather, it’s fair to say that indoor ice
rinks were created because in those conditions they provided welcome shelter for
those who enjoyed skating. It was only when ice became available year-round that
sports such as hockey and skating had a chance to flourish.

In 1876 the first indoor rink opened in London, although the idea was not
replicated up and down the country as had been predicted, as the process
entailed making the ice by pumping a mixture of glycerine and water through
copper pipes, a material which was expensive at that time. The first Olympic
figure-skating competition was held on a refrigerated indoor rink as part of the
Summer Games in London in 1908, though it was not until 1976 that ice-dancing,
that is, interpreting music on skates, became a Winter Olympics sport. In the early
twentieth century, electric refrigeration and indoor rinks made ice-skating popular
everywhere.

The technology that makes indoor rinks possible is also found in refrigerators
and air conditioning in our homes. In an indoor ice rink, the refrigerant doesn’t cool
the ice directly, as home systems do. instead, it cools sali water that is purnped
through an intricate system of pipes uriderneath the ice.

Laying down a good skating surface isn’t as simple as making a tray of ice
cubes. Freezing a rink correctly takes no less than a dozen stages, with some
stages laying ice that is wafer thin. And what’s best for one sport may be
completely unacceptable for another! It takes up to seventy thousand litres of
water to make a rink. The first two layers of ice, which are less than one millimetre
thick, are applied via a spray to create a fine mist of water. The first layer freezes
almost immediately after it’s sprayed on, and then the second is applied. The



=== Page 70 ===

Test 1 Key

PART 3

Stephen Perrins:
Interviewer:
Stephen Perrins:

120

Interviewer:

Interviewer:

second frozen layer is painted white, allowing for a strong contrast, for example, in
hockey, between the biack disc known as the puck and the ice. The third layer
acts as a sealer for the paint. This layer then requires painting to create decorative
backgrounds and, in the case of hockey, provide clear markings and display
sponsors’ logos. Once all the markings have dried, the final layer is gradually
applied. This uses forty thousand litres of water which must be put on siowly with
a hose at a rate of two to three thousand litres per hour. That means at least 15,
at most 20 hours for this final layer. The less water is put on the floor at one time,
the better the ice will be.

Brand new ice is called green ice because it hasn't been broken in yet. When
creating a new rink, indoor conditions are very important, with the skating surface
kept at -4.5 to —3° Celsius, the building temperature at about 17° Celsius, and the
indoor humidity at about 30%. But if it’s warm outdoors, the temperature has to be
re-adjusted accordingly. Even one degree can make a big difference in the quality
of the ice. In addition, a fog over the ice can be created by high humidity indoors
which, of course, would hold a hockey game up.

So, on a hot summer’s day when you...

pause]

Now you'll hear Part Two again.
tone

The recording is repeated.]
pause]

That’s the end of Part Two.
Now turn to Part Three.

pause]

You will hear the beginning of a radio interview with Stephen Perrins, a
composer of musicals. For questions 18 to 22, choose the answer (A, B, C
or D) which fits best according to what you hear.

You now have one minute in which to look at Part Three.
[pause]
tone

My guest today started out in the world of serious music and showed great
promise as an avant garde composer, but he made the surprising leap into the
world of the musical theatre. Welcome, Stephen Perrins.

Thank you.

Stephen, what made you change from serious music to musicals?

Well, my parents were both professors of music, so | dutifully went to music
college, studied composition, and wrote rather inaccessible music. But | suppose
really my heart's always been in the theatre, and | soon found myself writing
songs in secret, drawing my inspiration from musicals.

Did you try to get them published?

Stephen Perrins:

Interviewer:
Stephen Perrins:

Interviewer:
Stephen Perrins:

Interviewer:
Stephen Perrins:

Interviewer:
Stephen Perrins:

Interviewer:

Stephen Perrins:

Interviewer:

Stephen Perrins:

Interviewer:
Stephen Perrins:

tnterviewer:

Stephen Perrins:

Test 1 Key

No, for a long time | kept them to myself, even though | thought they were
commercial. | suppose | had something of an inferiority complex about them,
because they were a bit slushy, and | was sure my family and college would think
they were below me.

So what happened?

Well, we had a very light-hearted end-of-year show at college, and | decided,
more or less on impulse, to sing one of my songs, because it happened to fit
rather neatly into a sketch that Jenny Fisher and | wrote, which was a spoof
opera. And it kind of stole the show. A year later a schoolteacher friend, who'd
been in the cast, got in touch with me — he wanted a short musical for a concert at
his school. in fact, just as an experiment, Jenny and | had already worked up the
opera sketch into something we renamed Goldringer, without any real idea of
what to do with it next, so it just needed a bit of tinkering.

That was lucky.

The real break was that the music critic of a national paper had a child at the
school, and the following Sunday we read this rave review saying that Jenny and |
were the future of the musical, and of course we were on cloud nine, and we
immediately had music publishers lining up.

How did your family react?

Oh, they were aghast at first, but they came round, and they've been right behind
us ever since.

You've always said you won't do the lyrics of your songs. | presume you’ve tried.

| did with my early songs. In fact | could knock them off with a rather suspect
facility. But | realised that if | wrote both the words and the music I'd be working in
a kind of vacuum, and what | enjoy most is the collaboration and sparking off each
other's ideas.

There was a story in the papers recently that you wanted to direct your musicals,
too. Has anything come of that?

No, that just wasn’t true. | never claim to be a director, | always think when you’ve
actually appointed the director for a show, you shouldn't undermine them. For
example, in one of my shows, which Helen Downes directed, | wasn’t that happy
with the design, but she was passionate to have it, and it was right not to interfere.
Now in the last few years you've had great international success, but for some of
the more upmarket newspapers, it seems, you simply can’t put a foot right.

No, and | don’t really know quite why. Maybe I’m being big-headed, but | don’t
think it’s because of the music. | think it’s more that I’m not really that bothered
about my image, so | don’t do masses of PR. Which means | leave myself open to
that carping sort of criticism.

It seems to me it’s a kind of distaste for the popularity of your music.

It’s like the time when serious art critics looked down on the late 19th-century
artists, and their paintings were considered worthless. The fact is that if you went
into an art gallery, guess where the public were.

Just as the public are always to be found at your musicals. Stephen Perrins, thank
you.

Thank you.

[pause]
Now you'll hear Part Three again.

121


=== Page 71 ===

Test 1 Key

PART 4

122

Preseriter:

Arthur:

Carla:
Arthur:

Carla:

Arthur:

Carla:

Arthur:

Presenter:
Arthur:

tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

That’s the end of Part Three.

Now turn to Part Four.

[pause]

You will hear part of a radio arts programme, in which two people, Arthur
and Carla, are discussing a book called Windworld. For questions 23 to 28,
decide whether the opinions are expressed by only one of the speakers, or
whether the speakers agree. Write A for Arthur, C for Carla, or B for both,
where they agree.

You now have thirty seconds in which to look ai Part Four.
[pause]
tone

Today on A Good Read we are talking about George Swallow's novel Windworld,
published last year and it has just won the Bateman Prize. We have with us Arthur
Lachman, writer, and Carla Fletcher, who lectures in Engineering at King’s
College. Arthur, let's start with you...

Well, | read the novel when it first came out and | was very happy to be asked to
re-read it for this programme and | remembered the powerful characterisation —
the certainty of touch — particularly of the older protagonist, Joe Bean, and his
sisters, in the throes of change from one era to another.

Rather miserable characters but assured portraits.

Mmmm... What | valued as well was the atmosphere Swallow creates, the sense
that everything he created felt right within the time and place. Did you find that?
Very interesting question. As a scientist, | always come to books with a critical eye
for technical details. As | say, Joe Bean and his family as people rang incredibly
true for me. | found myself doubting whether certain incidents, ummm... certain
assumptions squared with the period in which the book is set.

| have to say that | found the sheer amount of technical detail about inventions,
which Swallow included as a labour of love, | have no doubt, gave the lay person
a hard time, making it difficult to follow the plot.

Umm. | actually found myself comparing all these descriptions of the windmills
and pumps with... with his earlier works Learner Games and Thorn... which both
dealt with the same period but neither of which included this kind of complexity.
Much more populist... deliberately more accessible to a wide readership.

There is much to link the writing of all three books: you can recognise Swallow's
individual voice in all of them — he’s speaking to one specific audience in my view.
Do you feel Windworld is a great novel?

Oh very much so. The current of the author's own life in the East of England
pulses through the whole work so compellingly. So, yes, | would say that it lifts this
book... ummm... into the category of great writing.

Carla:

Arthur:

Carla:

Arthur:

Test 1 Key

| wouldn't be quite that positive, though | do agree that the character of Joe Bean
draws its strength from the writer's close acquaintance with Joe’s environment: to
my mind he’s almost certainly Swallow putting himself in another age — positioning
himself, with his upbringing and his character and his beliefs, in the 18!" century.
! was intrigued by some of these set episodes, like the incident with the birds. It
was genuinely fascinating, | thought. | understand the film rights have been
bought. Do you think it'll work as well as the book does?

No question — if they keep away from too much social realism and misery. If they
don’t make Joe’s story the central one, it'll die a death.

Well — just about all the stories are likely to come through well, in my opinion.
We'll have to see how it turns out!

[pause]

Now you'll hear Part Four again.
tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

That’s the end of Part Four.

There will now be a pause of five minutes for you to copy your answers
onto the separate answer sheet. Be sure to follow the numbering of all the
questions. I’ll remind you when there is one minute left, so that you’re sure
to finish in time.

[pause]
You have one more minute left.
[pause]

That’s the end of the test. Please stop now. Your supervisor will now collect
all the question papers and answer sheets.

123



=== Page 72 ===

Test 2 Key

Paper 1 Reading (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)

1B 2C 3A 4D SA 6B 7B 8 D
10 B i1C 12A 13 B 14 A 15 C 16 A
17 Cc 18 A

9A

Part 2 (two marks for each correct answer)
19 A 20 D 21 C 22 D 23 A 24 D 25 B 26 A

Part 3 (two marks for each correct answer)
27 B 28 H 29 G 30 E 31 A 32 F 33. C

Part 4 (two marks for each correct answer)
34 D 35 B 36 A 37 C 38 A 39 D 40 C

Paper 2 Writing (2 hours)
Task-specific mark schemes

Question 1: Growing old

Content

Major points:

Discussion of: — whether or not old people have something useful to offer society
~ whether or not other people have to look after old people
— the advantages and disadvantages that belong to old age

Further points:
Relevant examples to support either or both of the views expressed.

Range

Language for expressing and supporting opinions, and for expressing agreement
and disagreement.

Appropriacy of register and format

Formal/semi-formal letter format. Register appropriate to the writer’s role as
reader of a magazine writing in to express opinions.

Organisation and cohesion
Clear organisation of points. Adequate use of paragraphing and linking.

Target reader
Would understand the writer’s viewpoint.

124

Test 2 Key

Question 2: Differences between rich and poor

Content

There may be some brief introduction to the causes of poverty, but the main
content should be suggestions on ways of helping to reduce the differences between
rich and poor, plus comments on why these ideas might work.

Range
Language for describing, analysing, evaluating and making recommendations.

Appropriacy of register and format

Register and format appropriate for that of a proposal — could make use of
relevant section headings. Register can be formal or neutral in tone, but must be
consistent.

Organisation and cohesion
Presentation of ideas and information should be well-structured. Adequate use of
linking and paragraphing.

Target reader /
The reader would have a clear idea of what suggestions are being made. i

Question 3: New leisure centre, library or playground?

Content

Description and analysis of what local residents think about the three proposals,
including recommendations based on the opinions that local residents have
expressed.

Range
Language of description, analysis and recommendation.

Appropriacy of register and format
Register and format appropriate for a report for the local council — could make use
of section headings. Register must be consistent.

Organisation and cohesion
Clear organisation of content with adequate use of linking and paragraphing.

Target reader
The local council would have a clear idea of what the local residents think the
money should be spent on.

Question 4: ‘A Country of Contrasts’

Content

Description of the different types of places that can be found.

Opinions about these different places.

Opinion of how these contrasts make the country an interesting place to visit.

Range
Language of description, comparison and opinion.

125



=== Page 73 ===

Test 2 Key

Appropriacy of register and format
Appropriate to an article in a travel magazine.

Organisation and cohesion
Magazine-style article possibly with headings to introduce different places.

Target reader ;
Would want to visit the country because of the contrasts and have a clear idea of

what the contrasts were.

Question S(a): The Accidental Tourist
Content

Clear reference to the book chosen.
Evaluation of the statement and whether or not it is true.

Range
Language of description, narration and evaluation.

Appropriacy of register and format
Neutral essay.

Organisation and cohesion ;
Clear presentation and development of ideas. Appropriate paragraphing and
linking. Clear conclusion.

Target reader ;
Would understand the viewpoint of the writer with regard to Macon.

Question 5(b): The Day of the Triffids

Content

Clear reference to the book chosen.

Description of events that changed the world, and an evaluation of whether or not
the book gives an optimistic view of human nature.

Range
Language of description, narration and evaluation.

Appropriacy of register and format
Review with register and format appropriate for a literary magazine. Register must
be consistent throughout.

Organisation and cohesion
Clear development from introduction to development of the main focus, leading to
a clear conclusion.

Target reader ; ;
Would have a clear understanding of the writer’s viewpoint.

126

Test 2 Key

Question 5(c): Our Man in Havana

Content

Close reference to the book chosen. Evaluation of whether the statement is true or
not. Reference to what is amusing and entertaining in the book, and whether or
not it has a serious moral purpose. Both parts of the question need to be addressed.
Range

Language of description, narration and evaluation.

Appropriacy of register and format

Clear presentation and development of ideas. Appropriate paragraphing and
linking. The two parts of the question can be dealt with separately or together.
Clear conclusion.

Organisation and cohesion
Neutral essay.

Target reader
Would understand the viewpoint of the writer.

Paper 3 Use of English (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)

1 one/ that 2 only NOT just 3 how 4 other 5 should

6 from 7 such 8 with 9 not 10 regard / respect / reference
NOT answers 11 none / nothing 12 far 13 however

14 may / might / would 15 though /as

Part 2 (one mark for each correct answer)

16 regularity 17 justice 18 mathematicians 19 repeatedly
20 unravel 21 breakthroughs 22 meteorology 23 spectacular
24 awesome 25 disclose

Part 3 (two marks for each correct answer)

26 short 27 rough 28 covered 29 touched 30 track
31 question :

Part 4 (one mark for each correct section)

32. as I enjoy / like reading, (1) + there are times when / that OR at times (1)

33 had been published / was published (1) + did the president make (1)

34 been for your support (1) + I’d still be (1)

35 expressed / voiced / made clear (1) + (their) disapproval of / about (1)

36 as no surprise to me (1) + to hear about / of (1)

37 ought to/should/ had /’d better say / mention (1) + anything / a word about (1)

38 (completely / totally) at a (total / complete) loss (1) + to explain / understand /
know / account for (the reason) as to / over (the reason) (1)

39 Minister’s resignation (1) + resulted from (1)

127


=== Page 74 ===

Test 2 Key

Part 5 (questions 40-43 two marks for each correct answer)

40 his wife gets angry and his children are contemptuous / mocking / insult him
41 they cannot be stopped

42 they are (self-sufficient) loners

43 more facilities would avoid overcrowding and therefore increase enjoyment

44 (one mark for each content point, up to ten marks for summary skills) PART 1
The paragraph should include the following points:
i the need to be alone / get away from others
ii personal challenge Extract 1
iii the pleasure of being in the fresh air
iv the need for stimulation / uplift / curiosity brought by new scenes and activities
Interviewer:
Paper 4 Listening (40 minutes approximately)
Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)
1B 2A 3.C 4A 5C 6B 7C 8A Nigel:
Part 2. (one mark for each correct answer) a Interviewer:
9 zoology 10 (human) eye(s) 11 feathers | ;
12 bee 13 rescuers / rescue(-)teams 14 (a) low speed / low speeds ] Nigel:
15 energy source / battery 16 take(-)off / taking off 17 (the) noise :
Part 3 (one mark for each correct answer) a Interviewer:
18 B 19 A 20 B 2ic 22 A | Nigel:
Part 4 (one mark for each correct answer)
23 G 24M 25 B 26 B 27 G 28 M
Transcript Certificate of Proficiency in English Listening Test. Test 2.
I’m going to give you the instructions for this test.
. . . Extract 2
Pll introduce each part of the test and give you time to look at
the questions.
At the start of each piece you'll bear this sound: : | Woman:
tone - Man:
You'll hear each piece twice. Woman:
| Man:
Remember, while you’re listening, write your answers on the = Woman:
question paper. : ,
You'll have five minutes at the end of the test to copy your oS Man:
answers onto the separate answer sheet. a
There will now be a pause. You must ask any questions now,
because you must not speak during the test.
128

Test 2 Key

[pause]

Now open your question paper and look at Part One.

[pause]

You'll hear four different extracts. For questions 1 to 8, choose the answer
(A, B or C) which fits best according to what you hear. There are two
questions for each extract.

[pause]
tone

So, finally Nigel, you achieved your ambition and made the break into films. It
seems to me you got a lot of stick about it, | mean, on the one hand from jealous
film makers, which is understandable, but also, more interestingly, from the literary
community in !reland, who seemed to be upset that you were doing something
quite so vulgar. Although presumably it’s good for the way Ireland is perceived
abroad.

That’s perfectly true. But you know, at the time, novelists didn’t make films. Now
it’s quite a common thing.

But isn’t it that rather conservative, orthodox Irish thing that serious writers don’t
stray away from the high realm of literature?

| wouldn't call it conservative and orthodox. | would say actually that the
importance of writing in Irish culture is huge. It’s always been the subversive force
in the culture itself.

But conservative in the sense that you’re not allowed to do anything else if that’s
what you’re capable of doing.

Well, it’s kind of seen as a vocation in a way, | suppose.

[pause]

tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

[pause]

tone

Do you know, an amazing thing happened to me yesterday: two totally
unconnected people looked me straight in the eye and told me they were sorry!
Nol!

Honest! You know | have a permit to park outside my flat?

Yes?

Well | was sent a new one in January, but some idiot had written the wrong year
on it, and | was fined for parking illegally.

Oh no!

129



=== Page 75 ===

rest 2 Key

Woman:

Extract 3

Extract 4

130

So | went storming into the town hall, spluttering with rage. And would you believe,
the woman behind the desk not only said sorry, but owned up that she recognised
her writing. It really took the wind out of my sails, and | found myself clucking
sympathetically and saying what an easy mistake it was to make! Then in the
afternoon | had someone coming round to repair my cooker, and he turned up
three hours late. | went ballistic when he arrived, but he apologised for disrupting
my day, and | stopped frothing at the mouth. Then his company rang, and it turned
out it wasn’t even his fault, so of course | felt ld made a real fool of myself!

[pause]

tone

[The recording is repeated.|
[pause]

[pause]

tone

Have you ever wondered why something makes you laugh? Human beings love to
laugh so much that there are actually industries built around laughter. For us it
seems so natural, but laughter is a distinctly human response. Philosopher John
Morreall believes that the first human laughter may have begun as a gesture of
shared relief at the passing of danger. The relaxation that results from a bout of
laughter inhibits the biological fight-or-flight response, laughter may signal trust in
one’s companions. Studies have also found that dominant individuals — whether
boss, tribal chief or family patriarch — use humour more than their subordinates. If
you've often thought that people at work laugh sycophantically when the boss
laughs, you're very perceptive. In such cases, Morreall says, controlling the
laughter of a group becomes a way of exercising power by controlling the group
dynamics. So laughter, like much human behaviour, must have evolved to
influence the way people interact. And there have been numerous interesting...

[pause]

tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

[pause]

tone

One day in 1993 | got a cali from TV producer Tim Taylor, asking me to meet him
to discuss a new series popularising history. I'd never heard of Tim but he
explained historian Mike Lewis was the other person fronting the programme. rd
met Mike before and couldn’t think of anyone I'd rather embark on a project with.
We met and, though | had some reservations about the way it would all turn out, |
agreed to sign up for the pilot programrne, hoping that the TV company would like
this initial episode.

PART 2

Test 2 Key

Now the problem with a pilot is that everyone knows best — until it’s finished you
can’t tell who’s right. We weren’t confident that history alone would galvanise an
audience. My experience of storytelling might prove useful in getting history
across. | thought this was a great idea and got really engrossed in my solo about
a fanatical medieval monk. Looking back, this does look terribly self-indulgent and
reduces the programme to a snail’s crawl. But we submitted it to the broadcasters
who were Critical of this, but they offered us a series and the rest is history — quite
literally!

[pause]

tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

That’s the end of Part One.
Now turn to Part Two.

[pause]

You will hear an engineer giving a talk on the radio about future
developments in robot design. For questions 9 to 17, complete the sentences
with a word or short phrase.

You now have forty-five seconds in which to look at Part Two.

[pause]

tone

By dint of brute force and massive use of external energy we can outpace all other
animals, but when it comes to sheer finesse and the use of cunning tricks of
aerodynamics, the animal kingdom leaves us standing. Increasingly, engineers
are looking to zoology for clues on improving performance or making robots that
can cope with harsh environments. But although it takes modern science to
fathom exactly how animals do things, there’s nothing new about the basic
principle of trying to copy nature. For instance would we have tried so hard to
create flying machines if it wasn’t for the example of birds? But in the early days of
aeronautical engineering, scientists had inadequate observation techniques, they
relied solely on the human eye. Initially, as a consequence of that, they thought
that the secret of how birds flew lay in the flapping movements that they made and
the pattern of feathers alone. If they'd looked at the right aspects of engineering
and bird flight, they would have achieved powered flight and manned flight earlier.

Interestingly, flapping wings are now making a comeback. After a century in
which powered flight used only fixed and rotating wings, engineers are
rediscovering the benefits of how insects fly. They’re trying to produce a fifteen-
centimetre flying robot, derived in part from the bee. The potential uses of such a
machine are limited only by the imagination. For example, it could be used where
buildings have collapsed and there are possible casualties to be rescued. lf a
person is trapped and is still breathing, then there is an opening through which air.
is coming in and a robot could fly in through this opening and take a photograph

131



=== Page 76 ===

Test 2 Key

PART 3

132

which would help the rescuers to assess the position and plan the operation
better.

But why model the robot on insect flight at all? The answer to this is that only an
insect is up to the demands of the job. If you think of working inside buildings,
manoeuvring at low speeds is essential because otherwise the robot will collide
with obstructions. It will need to be able to hover, because if it finds something of
interest, it will have to stay still to take a clear picture of it. And finally, and this is a
very important requirement, the robot must fly in a power-efficient way, because it
will be fairly small so there won't be much space to put in an energy source. So
the first thought of the design team was to use some conventional design like a
fixed-wing forward thrust, as in the usual plane, or alternatively, rotary wings,
found in a helicopter, and scale them down to fifteen centimetres. The problem is
that planes require considerable speed to achieve take-off, so they can't fly very
slowly and also they can’t hover or manoeuvre in a very agile way. So would
helicopters be more appropriate? They can certainly fly very slowly and hover and
they are very manoeuvrable, but they have other problems: they generate
considerable noise, so that would rule out any situations where the robots would
need to remain undetected such as in undercover surveillance or data gathering
projects. So, having eliminated the tried and tested designs, the question was
what other proven design was there? In 300 million years flapping-wing insects
have certainly proved their efficiency. They offer agility even at low speed, they
can do amazing aerobatics, they can hover, and unlike helicopters their flight
mechanism generates very little noise.

There's more to insect flight than just flapping wings though. The movements of
those wings are remarkably complex. For engineers to create a successful flying
robot they will have to draw on the accumulated knowledge of zoologists. It’s
going to be a hard but fascinating journey of discovery.

[pause]

Now you'll hear Part Two again.

tone

[The recording is repeated.]

[pause]

That’s the end of Part Two.

Now turn to Part Three.

[pause]

You will hear a radio interview with a music critic, Hazel Fisher, about

some classical music awards. For questions 18 to 22, choose the answer
(A, B, C or D) which fits best according to what you hear.

You now have one minute in which to look at Part Three.
[pause]

tone

Presenter:

Hazel:

Presenter:
Hazel:

Presenter:
Hazel:

Presenter:
Hazel:

Presenter:

Hazel:

Presenter:
Hazel:

Presenter:

Test 2 Key

Now here’s our regular critic Hazel Fisher, who’s been invited to vote in a new
initiative, the Classical Music Awards. Hazel, giving awards for classical music is
surely a healthy development, isn’t it?

On the face of it, yes. When these awards were announced recently, it seemed
like a genuinely enlightened idea. There’s the prospect of a huge amount of
publicity surrounding the event, so it seemed like a high-profile boost for the
serious classical market.

And it’s well-timed, too, isn’t it?

Very well-timed, because a lot of people don’t hold out much hope for classical
music sales. Here at last, | thought, would be recognition for all those small record
companies who continue to produce worthwhile releases, while the major
companies are just concerned with a safe repertoire and endlessly reissuing their
old recordings. And at the same time, it would help all those performers who
produce excellent music without any of the trappings of jetset celebrity. You know,
it makes me so cross that the glossiest new recordings nowadays are usually
turned into an international circus of the same bankable names. It certainly
wouldn't come amiss if a wider range of performers were brought into the limelight
for a change.

So why did your enthusiasm evaporate?

It was when the list of nominations was announced. It was clear that the whole
exercise was nothing more than a cynical marketing exercise, with two aims. One
was to eat even further into the distinction between what’s worthwhile and what's
just opportunistic rubbish. And the second was to bolster the sales of the
industry’s heavyweight companies, who have invested so heavily in these
crossover products, that won’t stand the test of time.

Crossover?

That’s when classical singers, orchestras, and so on, play non-classical music,
like musicals or pop or jazz.

Right. Now, you also object to the way the final choices are going to be made,
don’t you?

Yes, | do. Ten nominations’ve been made in each category, and the winners will
be chosen by an ‘academy’ of recording industry stalwarts. So if there’s no bias
there, | will eat my hat. It hasn’t been made public how the voting will work, but
rumour has it that it’s pretty opaque, though designed to be as fair as possible.
Goodness knows how iong the whole thing will take, especially as there are a lot
of sections, but that’s their problem. They've allowed several months before the
awards ceremony.

And what do you think about the nominations themselves?

I find those absolutely mind-boggling. it’s still a mystery who actually compiled
these shortlists, but they would have us believe that film music and other
lightweight work are among the ten best ‘classical’ albums of the year. And the
fact that they only include one or two genuine classical items in each list shows
what they’re really interested in. For instance, take the Male Artist of the Year
category: it’s beyond me how anyone can choose between, say, a singer
specialising in 17h and 18th century operas and a composer of film scores. It
would take a more sophisticated knowledge of the musical world than | have.

So whai’s your verdict?



=== Page 77 ===

"est 2 Key

Hazel:

Presenter:

ART 4

Graham:

Melinda:

Graham:
Melinda:

Graham:

Melinda:

Graham:

Well, it’s hard to escape the conclusion that the organising group, and the record
companies that constitute it, are happy to move the goalposts whenever it suits
them commercially. Which brings up a wonderful irony too. Recently the record
companies have been complaining bitterly because a CD of popular classics given
a synthesiser makeover was included in the classical bestsellers chart. But now
they seem only too happy to go along with this farrago, which does more to
confuse the boundaries between what's classical and what’s popular (if that’s the
right classification) than any amount of synthesiser doodlings.

But do you think we should even care about it at all?

[pause]

Now you'll hear Part Three again.
tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

That’s the end of Part Three.
Now turn to Part Four.

[pause]

You will hear two neighbours, Graham and Melinda, discussing changes
that the town council are making to a public park near their homes. For
questions 23 to 28, decide whether the opinions are expressed by only one
of the speakers, or whether the speakers agree. Write G from Graham,

M for Melinda, or B for both, where they agree.

You now have thirty seconds in which to look at Part Four.

[pause]

tone

Have you seen what’s happening in Baxton Park, Melinda? The town council's put
all this fencing round so you can’t get in. And they've brought in an earthmover to
churn up all the grass and level the ground. It looks awful!

Oh | know. It /s a pity. It used to belong to some member of the aristocracy, you
know, as part of her land, about a hundred years ago.

Yes, | think | heard that somewhere.

Apparently she gave it to the people of Baxton for their ‘recreational use’. That’s
what she said in her will.

Oh did she? But then surely they can’t go ahead with developing it? She can’t
have wanted it dug up like this! It’s against the terms of the will!

| suppose it depends what you mean by ‘recreational use’, doesn’t it? It could
mean for sport, couldn’t it? And we know they’re going to put two football pitches
and a cricket ground on it.

Yes, and what they call a hospitality building right in the middle. That’s being paid
for by one of the local companies, you know.

Melinda:

Graham:

Melinda:

Graham:

Melinda:
Graham:

Melinda:

Graham:

Melinda:
Graham:
Melinda:

Test 2 Key

Oh dear! | can just see it being used to host parties every weekend, and then
people’il be coming and going at ali hours of the night! How are we ever going to
get a decent night’s sleep?

Oh, | think the trees will probably muffle the sound quite a bit, after all they’re quite
dense round here. I’m more worried about the parking. This is going to attract a lot
of people and the road’s busy enough as it is.

i know, | often have difficulty finding a space. | mean it took me a quarter of an
hour the other day. What really gets me is the way all this has been managed. It’s
so underhand! | mean, we scotched the plan when it surfaced five years ago, and
now, without a word of warning to any of us locals, it’s reared its ugly head again.
We really should have been given the chance to have our say, shouldn’t we?
That’s the least you’d expect. You know, | was just wondering...

What? Go on.

Well, of course, it’s just a suspicion, | haven’t any proof as such, but | was just
wondering if anybody on the council had been, you know, got at by the
developers. | mean, it’s quite a big project. There'll be some lucrative contracts in
there.

You're getting paranoid, Graham! Been watching too many movies about big
business! No, | think we just have to accept it. There’s nothing any of us can do
about it.

What about cailing a protest meeting? We could phone up the local paper and get
their photographer round. You never know, we might just get them to think again.
Oh yes? And do you really think that’s going to get us anywhere?

Well OK, just a thought.

Maybe we should try looking on the bright side...

[pause]

Now you'll hear Part Four again.
tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

That’s the end of Part Four.

There will now be a pause of five minutes for you to copy your answers
onto the separate answer sheet. Be sure to follow the numbering of all the
questions. I'll remind you when there is one minute left, so that you’re sure
to finish in time.

[pause]
You have one more minute left.

[pause]

That’s the end of the test. Please stop now. Your supervisor will now collect
all the question papers and answer sheets.



=== Page 78 ===

Test 3 Key

Paper 1 Reading (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)

iA 2B 3 8B 4A 5 C 6D 7A 8B
id Cc 11 B 12 D 13 D 14€ 15 B 16 A
i7 Cc 18 D

Part 2 (two marks for each correct answer)
19 C 20 A 21 B 22 A 23 B 24 D 25 B 26 D

Part 3 (two marks for each correct answer)
27 G 28 E 29 B 30 H 31 D 32 A 33. C

Part 4 (two marks for each correct answer)
34 A 35 C 36 C 37 D 38 B 39 C 40 B

Paper 2 Writing (2 hours)
Task-specific mark schemes

Question 1: Employment in the future
Content
Major points:
Discussion of: — whether or not unemployment will continue to rise as a result of
the increasing use of machines/computers and the need for profits
— whether or not new developments will create new job
opportunities
— the writer’s own viewpoint on the matter

Range :
Language for expressing and supporting opinions, and for reaching conclusions.

Appropriacy of register and format
Formal essay-type register.
Register appropriate to the writer’s role as a student.

Organisation and cohesion a ;
Clear organisation of points. Adequate use of linking and paragraphing
Logical development of argument and clear conclusion(s).

Target reader ; ; ;
The tutor would understand the writer’s viewpoint.

136

Question 2: ‘Healthy Lifestyles for the Young’ magazine

Content

Should discuss possible coverage of health and lifestyle issues, and ideas for
interesting content for young people.

Organisation of different types of articles, presentation, style.

Range

Language for describing.

Language for analysing.

Language for hypothesising and recommending.

Appropriacy of register and format
Proposal format — may make use of clear section headings.
Register appropriate to semi-formal relationship.

Organisation and cohesion
Well-structured sections.

Clear presentation of ideas.
Clear linking and paragraphing.

Target reader
Would understand what the writer is proposing.

Question 3: Protecting endangered animals, birds and plants

Content
Description of why forms of nature and wild life are endangered, and concrete
suggestions for helping to protect them.

Range
Language of description, analysis and suggestion.

Appropriacy of register and format
Register and format appropriate for a letter to a magazine. Register must be
consistent.

Organisation and cohesion
Early reference to reason for writing. Clear organisation of points. Adequate use of
linking and paragraphing.

Target reader
Readers would have a clear idea of the writer’s suggestions for saving endangered
species.

Question 4: ‘Good Neighbours’

Content

Description of a difficult situation.

How the neighbour helped out.

Conclusions about what makes a good neighbour.

Range
Language of description and narration.

Test 3 Key

137


=== Page 79 ===

Test 3 Key

Appropriacy of register and format
Register appropriate for a popular magazine.
Article format could lend itself to headings.

Organisation and cohesion
Clear development of description and narration.
Adequate use of linking and paragraphing.

Target reader

Would be interested in reading the story of the event, understand why the
neighbour was so appreciated by the writer and what, in the opinion of the writer,
makes a good neighbour.

Question S(a): The Accidental Tourist

Content

Clear reference to the book chosen.

Description and analysis of reasons for the failure of the marriage of Sarah and
Macon. Evaluation of whether Macon’s comment is true or not.

Range
Language of description, narration and evaluation.

Appropriacy of register and format
Neutral article.

Organisation and cohesion
Clear presentation and development of ideas. Appropriate linking and
paragraphing. Clear conclusion.

Target reader
Would understand the viewpoint of the writer and have a clear idea of the reasons
for the failure of the marriage of Sarah and Macon.

Question 5(b): The Day of the Triffids

Content

Clear reference to the book chosen.

Evaluation of whether the statement is true or not.

Description of what the triffids are and what they do, and reference to other
characters and how they respond to the situation.

Range
Language of description, narration, comparison and evaluation.

Appropriacy of register and format
Formal letter appropriate for a literary magazine. Register must be consistent
throughout.

Organisation and cohesion
Clear presentation and development of ideas with appropriate linking of
paragraphs from the introduction to the main body of the letter. Clear conclusion.

Target reader
Would be clear about the writer’s viewpoint on the matter.

138

Test 3 Key
Question 5(c): Our Man in Havana
Content
Close reference to the book chosen.
Description of the portrayal of Wormold as a secret agent, and an analysis of how
far the novel is a typical spy story.
Range
Language of description, narration, analysis and evaluation.
Appropriacy of register and format
Review with register and format appropriate to the Arts Section of a newspaper.
Register must be consistent throughout.
Organisation and cohesion
Clear presentation and development of ideas. Appropriate paragraphing and
linking. Clear conclusion.
Target reader
Would be informed about the book and the portrayal of Wormold as a secret
agent, and how far the novel is a typical spy story.
Paper 3 Use of English (1 hour 30 minutes)
Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)
1 who 2 to 3 when 4 having 5 of 6 due/ thanks / owing
7 what 8 its / the 9 no 10 it 11 into 12 only
13 whose 14 because / as / since 15 could / may / might
Part 2 (one mark for each correct answer)
16 infancy 17 institutions 18 exclusively 19 insight
20 disappearing 21 commitment 22 inaccessible 23 loneliness
24 immersion 25 undeniably
Part 3 (two marks for each correct answer)
26 reflection 27 bear 28 stage 29 line 30 volume 31 moved
Part 4 (one mark for each correct section)
32 were (completely) taken (1) + aback (completely) at / by (1)
33 given (1) + a standing ovation (1)
34 matter (1) + how late it (1)
35 no idea (of) what (1) + was going (1)
36 (many) hours (have passed) since OR(many) hours ago that (1) + I (first)
joined (1)
37 any /a likelihood / possibility / chance (1) + of (my / me) having a (private /
quiet) (1)
38 look / are (remarkably / very / incredibly) alike (1) + in the (1)
39 do / can we account for (1) + the fact that the / the way (that) the / why the (1)
139



=== Page 80 ===

Test 3 Key

Part 5 (questions 40-43 two marks for each correct answer)
40 They process the information according to their experience and needs.
41 By seeing them regularly many times. ;
42, (They’re like a net) ~ they filter information / data from the outside world /
they prevent certain things / information / data from passing through.
43 Instinctively but with cultural differences
44 (one mark for each content point, up to ten marks for summary skills)
The paragraph should include the following points:
i seeing parts rather than the whole — flecks of colour / notes
ii not being able to distinguish objects
iii too much noise to pick out sounds
iv it would put our lives in danger

Paper 4 Listening (40 minutes approximately)

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)
18 2C 3B 4C 5 Cc 6A 7C 8B

Part 2. (one mark for each correct answer)

9 rattle 10 cliff faces/cliffs 11 window(-)sills
13 cover 14 nesting 15 a/one hundred/100
being neglected (deliberately) 17 locations

12 repopulate
16 (deliberate) neglect/

Part 3. {one mark for each correct answer)
18 B 19 C 20 A 21 D 22 D

Part 4 (one mark for each correct answer)
23 T 24 B 25 C 26 C 27 T 28 T

Transcript Certificate of Proficiency in English Listening Test. Test 3.
I'm going to give you the instructions for this test.

Pll introduce each part of the test and give you time to look at the
questions.

At the start of each piece you'll hear this sound:
tone
You'll hear each piece twice.

Remember, while you're listening, write your answers on the question

paper.

140

PART 1

Extract 1

interviewer:

Balloonist:
Interviewer:
Balloonist:

Interviewer:
Balloonist:

Extract 2

Presenter:

Test 3 Key

You'll have five minutes at the end of the test to copy your answers onto the
separate answer sheet.

There will now be a pause. You must ask any questions now, because you
must not speak during the test.

[pause]
Now open your question paper and look at Part One.

[pause]

You'll hear four different extracts. For questions 1 to 8, choose the answer
(A, B or C) which fits best according to what you hear. There are two
questions for each extract.

[pause]
tone

Reading your book about your career exploits, | have to say it does sound to me
as if you've done what a lot of kids dream of, and managed to make a living out of,
let's face it, larks, high spirits. It’s akin to having the nerve to go te a company and
ask for a million pounds to go on holiday.

lf's been wonderful.

Long before this you started as a photographer.

Yes, I’ve always liked imagery — that’s part of the reason why | got involved in all
these dreams, as you call them, of adventure. It’s pure theatre, really.

And you did a spell in advertising, | read.

Yes, | did ... and it was at that time in 1975 when | had my first balloon flight and
in those days they really were the stuff of dreams, and it occurred to me that there
must be a possibility to do something here with these huge billboards in the sky
and to make a living out of it.

[pause]

tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

[pause]

tone

Robin Adams, you've recently published a book of photographs of famous
women, with the proceeds going to a number of charities. How did you decide
who to photograph? Are they people you had an interest in already because
they’re very high profile? Or did you think, there’s a hook there? And I’m actually
interested in photographing this person.

141



=== Page 81 ===

Test 3 Key

Robin Adams:

Presenter:

Robin Adams:

Extract 3

Extract 4

142

Well, although they are all, as you say, high-profile women, we went about this in
a low-key way. I'd heard of most of them, or, at least, their reputations, and had
seen their various media images. There’s always more to people than meets the
eye, or the camera lens — and it was that something ! wanted to expose. But this
proved more of a thorny issue than I'd expected.

Oh really, | thought it would have been easier, they would have known exactly
how to present themselves. They’ve done it so many times before.

Well, in my work, | get behind the veneer of the face. The women feel secure
enough to open up about themselves, and | have to be careful not to betray too
much of that.

[pause]

tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

{pause]

tone

I'm ringing about Stoke City football team. I’ve been a supporter of theirs for
years. You'll have noticed in Saturday's match just how much we miss Steve
Harris. We lack the power up front since he’s gone. There were some nice

touches from Evans, but the real strength that Harris represented, that’s served us ©

well over the years, was just missing on Saturday. It was a gaping hole in Stoke’s
attack, and I’m sure the manager's regretting selling him. | mean, we don’t need
the £11 million that Barcelona paid us, we need our goal-scorer back! If you speak
to the Stoke fans, most of them will say no amount of training will produce another
Harris. He provided the punch and that just wasn’t there on Saturday. No wonder
we lost! Still, for a good thirty minutes our lads dominated the field. They showed
some spirit, | must say. They haven't thrown in the towel yet, so provided we get a
good replacement for Harris, (and the manager’d better get it right this time!)
maybe there’ll be light at the end of the tunnel after all.

[pause]

tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

[pause]

tone

When we managed to get it hoisted, for the first time since 1800, well, it was a
struggle, but thank goodness, we did it. So then this immense amount of sail was
hanging in the museum. | thought people would come in and go Wow! and then
read the relevant information boards we'd put underneath. But there was a new
dimension to this exhibition that | simply hadn’t envisaged. People felt as if they
were travelling back in time, because here they could see for themselves the
reality of damage to a sailing ship on the high seas two centuries ago. You can

PART 2

Interviewer:

Sean Pearce:

Test 3 Key

see this great rent, which is about eight metres deep in the centre, and as you go
closer to the cloth, not only do you get this sort of shine on the cloth itself, and you
can see how it’s aged and coloured, but at various points there are gunpowder
stains of shots that must have passed through it, so again there’s the reality. This
isn’t just.4 textbook or a computer game about history for you to look ai, this is
the...

[pause]

tone

[The recording is repeated. |
[pause]

That’s the end of Part One.
Now turn to Part Two.

[pause]

You will hear a short talk about a bird of prey called the kestrel. For
questions 9 to 17, complete the sentences with a word or short phrase.

You now have forty-five seconds in which to look at Part Two.
[pause]
tone

Today we’re very pleased to welcome Sean Pearce, from the British Nature Trust,
who is going to talk about one of the most beautiful birds to be seen in Britain: the
kestrel. Sean...

Thank you. I’m here to launch the Trust’s publicity campaign. Recent, relatively
small-scale research we’ve carried out is indicating a significant decline in kestrel
numbers and basically we’re asking the public to help us get our statistics even
more accurate.

But first, let me give you a few facts on the bird to help in sighting and a little
background information and an explanation of the cause of some of its problems.
The kestrel — its unusual name comes from the old French for a rattle — and that
refers not to the fluttering wing movement but to its cry. This is very distinctive. It
has the capacity to hang in the air for long periods with its wings vibrating so
rapidly you can hardly see the movement. This is a picture ofa mature male
hovering. Notice its beautiful plumage in different shades of brown and cream and
its easily recognised fluted tail — the picture is reproduced for you in the survey
material to help in identification.

Now, before the diversification of their habitat in the last hundred years or so,
kesirels were solely to be found nesting on cliff faces and their main prey was the
vole — a smail mouse-like creature in the countryside but which now will be
unfamiliar to many of you. But, now, kestrels are increasingly making their home
in towns where they’re not an uncommon sight these days, they settle on the
window sills of houses, skyscrapers etc. Now, turning to food in this new habitat,
they depend not on their rural staple.of voles, who don’t appear to do very well in
this setting, but on whichever small rodents they can find, and these are to be

143


=== Page 82 ===

Test 3 Key

PART 3

144

found in abundance. Kestrels have also found a viable habitat in upland areas,
mainly the preserve of sheep farming, which is proving to be a problem, as we
shall see. ;

Kestrels have actually been known to be highly successful in keeping up their
numbers over the years because of their notable ability to quickly repopulate. How
this works is simple — they aren’t dependent on one locale and can gradually
move to where the habitat is more favourable. But this is only effective when
problems affect a small area. Difficulties at a macro level are now beginning to
affect them. For example, upland kesire!s suffer due to increasing sheep
densities. Their grazing decreases the vegetation which provides cover for the
main upland kestrel food, the vole, which of course, in turn means a large
population of the birds of prey cannot be maintained. These problems have been
compounded by long periods of heavy precipitation — mainly rain, but also snow,
which causes nesting difficulties.

Now let's have a look at some of the population statistics. Excuse me, there are
thought to be in the region of 50,000 breeding pairs — that’s 100,000 adults — left
in the UK, which means, with an average of three offspring per pair, circa 250,000
birds. But kestrels have a relatively low survival rate when young, which helps
cushion extremes in population — a built-in control, if you like. Only a proportion
survive — many succumbing in infancy because of their parents’ deliberate
neglect. Now, because of the changes mentioned earlier, the population is falling
further and will soon, we believe, not be able to recover. Something must be done
and that’s where the public come in!

What we ask of you is to take two or three of these sighting forms, I'll pass
some out in a moment, but I'll also leave a pile at the back, which you can fill in
when you have a sighting. They ask for information about numbers, timing and,
crucially, location. There is a picture, as promised, and sirnple diagrammatic
information to help you establish whether what you have seen is really a kestrel
and not confuse it with, for example, a peregrine falcon.

Thank you very much indeed for your time and attention. | hope you'll be able to
help us.

[pause]

Now you'll hear Part Two again.
tone

[The recording is repeated.|
[pause]

That's the end of Part Two.
Now turn to Part Three.

[pause]

You will hear the historian, George Davies, talking about society and the
theatre in England in the time of William Shakespeare. For questions 18 to
22, choose the answer (A, B, C or D) which fits best according to what you
hear.

Interviewer:

Professor:

interviewer:
Professor:

Interviewer:

Professor:

Interviewer:

Professor:

Interviewer:

Professor:

Test 3 Key

You now have one minute in which to look at Part Three.
[pause]
tone

We welcome today Professor George Davies from the University of Wales.
Professor Davies is an expert on society in sixteenth-century England, the time of
Queen Elizabeth the First and, of course, Shakespeare. So how would you
categorise society at that time, Professor?

Weil, it was certainly a society undergoing dramatic changes in which there was
an explosion of interest in the language, even though the printed word hadn’t
become universaily availabie. We don’t quite know exactly how many people
could read and write but literacy would not have extended to ail levels of society.
Some historians call it an illiterate society, but that seerns rather pejorative. No,
the besi way of putting it, in my view, is to refer to it as a pre-literate society, like
most societies that have ever been on the planet. In fact our society, in which we
tend to expect everyoody to be literate, is the one which is out of step.

So how did this pre-literacy affect ability to communicate at that time?

What it meant was that the prime form of communication was direct speech, face
to face, which means communication involving the body, the stance, the distance
between people. it also meant that people were much more finely tuned to the
spoken word, they could take in more of it, they could listen in a more acute way.
it’s therefore quite natural that the art form which corresponds to that particular
situation should be drama.

One thing that has always puzzied me is where did the aciors in the sixteenth
century learn their craft? Were there any drama schools then?

Well, Shakespeare’s actors, the boys and the older men in his company, didn’t
actually have any acting training before they joined his company. You see, in
Shakespeare’s day you learned your school work by repeating it out loud all day
long. The arts of oratory and rhetoric were part of your normal education and they
were also the means by which you learned. So they had wonderful voice training,
which enabled them to develop an individual style.

I've always thought of the Elizabethan society as one that revelled in its voice, that
at its heart delighted in giving voice to words. Would that be correct?

| would certainly think that the atmosphere in the average theatre of the time
would surprise us today. | believe it would sound and feel more like a present day
football ground! In a modern theatre there’s a sort of reverential hush as the
darkness descends and we feel, you know, that we're in some sort of temple
devoted to the worship of great art. But then, the atmosphere would have been
much noisier. Remember Shakespeare and his contemporaries had theatres
which were open to the sky, and so the noise of the city, the shouts of the street
sellers, the neighing of horses and so forth would add to and mix with the sounds
of the stage and indeed, in my view, would comment on them.

So, in the same way, this was not a world for the shy or the softly spoken?

Not at all. People’s voices in the sixteenth century, it seems to me, wouldn’t have
been geared to the exchange of intimate revelations about the self. This is a
notion of speaking that is a twentieth-century concept, as is our notion that a play
should give you the intimate, personal feelings of the author or of a character on
the stage. Then, art was iargely about external issues, how a country should be
governed, how one should deal with rebellion, questions of that order.

145


=== Page 83 ===

Test 3 Key

Interviewer:

PART 4

146

Clare:
Tom:

Clare:

Tom:

Clare:

Tom:

Clare:
Tom:

Clare:

Tom:
Clare:
Tom:

Fascinating, Professor. I’d like at this point to bring in another speaker who is
going to tell us about Elizabethan court life and how Shakespeare...

[pause]
Now you'll hear Part Three again.

tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

That’s the end of Part Three.
Now turn to Part Four.

[pause]

You will bear a conversation in which Clare and Tom, who teach English to
foreign students at the same language school, discuss Tom’s first week at
the school. For questions 23 to 28, decide whether the opinions are
expressed by only one of the speakers, or whether the speakers agree. Write
C for Clare, T for Tom, or B for both, where they agree.

You now have thirty seconds in which to look at Part Four.
[pause]
tone

Hello, Tom. How are you finding teaching here?

Bit early to say, really, Clare. But | get the odd feeling that somehow the school’s
successful despite itself.

How do you mean?

Well, it claims to be really up-to-date, but the buildings and furniture have seen
better days, and the equipment’s on its last legs, yet amazingly the students seem
happy.

Maybe the good atmosphere is partly because the building and things aren’t up to
much. People don’t feel they always have to be on their best behaviour.

That just sounds like an excuse for being an also-ran! These days you can’t
compete unless you can really provide the best. That's the trouble with these
small family-owned schools. So many of the owners still seem to be in the Dark
Ages.

In what way?

They seem to believe that if the teaching’s good enough, they'll get students, but
quality doesn’t sell itself these days, if it ever did.

That’s because most of the students come through word of mouth. Though | don’t
know how long that’ll keep the school going. So many other schools have really
good marketing machines. But | suppose we’re going to have to bite the bullet. |
doubt if there’ll be a place much longer for family-owned schools, the way things
are going, with so many being taken over by large companies that own several
schools.

Do you think there’s a chance of surviving if they find a niche?

Like English for business, or for university, you mean?

Yes.

Clare:
Tom:

Clare:
Tom:

Clare:
Tom:
Clare:
Tom:
Clare:
Tom:

Clare:

Tom:

Clare:

Tom:

Clare:

Tom:

Test 3 Key

That’s a point. There are some very successful ones that have stayed one-offs.
Well, their days are numbered if you ask me. More and more are being bought by
companies.

Yes. Some companies seem to offer a whole range of subjects, not just English.

[ think that’s good, because they can bring together a mixture of teachers of
different subjecis.

That’s all very well, but it doesn’t do much for your professional development,
does it?

Surely it gives a different perspective on the classroom? A geography teacher,
say, might give you fresh ideas that you can apply in teaching English or maths.
I’ve always found it a real eye-opener talking to other English teachers. Because
people’s approaches to teaching the same subject can vary so much. | sometimes
feel I’m not on the same wavelength as science teachers!

Oh Clare, honestly!

Well maybe I’m exaggerating a bit, but you know what | mean.

Actually | sometimes feel that about classes, you know? And | feel it’s my role as
the teacher to make sure we get on all right, but | can’t always do it.

Surely it depends on the class too? Each class develops its own culture, and you
may not be able to do anything about it. You just have to accept that you don’t get
on with every class.

| reckon that’s a bit of a cop-out, really. I’m sure you ought to be flexible enough to
deai with any class effectively, but | can’t always do it.

Maybe it comes with experience. Do you think you'll stay here long?

Depends how it pans out. | need to believe I’m doing something worthwhile, even
if the money isn’t brilliant. | hope that comes, when I’ve had a chance to get
settled.

It doesn’t matter that much to me, | suppose, because | put a lot of energy into
other things. So | could put up with quite a lot, as long as I’ve got enough to live
on, of course.

Mm. ! wish | had the time for other things. I’m sure...

[pause]

Now you'll hear Part Four again.
tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

That’s the end of Part Four.

There will now be a pause of five minutes for you to copy your answers
onto the separate answer sheet. Be sure to follow the numbering of all the
questions. I'll remind you when there is one minute left, so that you're sure
to finish in time.

[pause]

You have one more minute left.

[pause]

That’s the end of the test. Please stop now. Your supervisor will now collect
all the question papers and answer sheets.

147


=== Page 84 ===

Test 4 Key

Paper 1 Reading (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)

1A 2C 3B 4D 5B 6A 7A gC
10 B 11D 12C 13 C 14 3B iS A 16 D

17. C 18 D

9A

Part 2 (two marks for each correct answer)
19 C 20 D 21 3B 22 A 23 B 24 A 25 C 26 A

Part 3 (two marks for cach correct answer)
27 E 28 C 29H 30 B 31G 32 A 33 D

Part 4 (two marks for each correct answer)
34 B 35 B 36 D 37 B 38 C 39 C 40 A

Paper 2 Writing (2 hours)
Task-specific mark schemes

Question 1: Fast food restaurant

Content

Major points:

Discussion of: The advantages versus the drawbacks, e.g.
— encouraging more people to visit the town
— the possible increase in revenue
— the interest generated in local history

Range

Language for expressing and supporting views, and for making recommendations.

Appropriacy of register and format
Appropriate format for a proposal — may make use of headings.

Organisation and cohesion
Ideas organised and well-structured. ;
Adequate use of paragraphing and linking.

Target reader ; ; ;
The local council would understand the writer’s viewpoint.

148

Question 2: Review of an adventure holiday

Content

Description of the adventure holiday, with reference to exploring interesting places,
meeting different people and experiencing a different lifestyle, as well as some kind
of recommendation, relevant to students wanting a cheap but exciting holiday.

Range
Language of description, narration, evaluation and recommendation.

Appropriacy of register and format
Formal/informal register appropriate for a review in a college magazine. Register
must be consistent throughout.

Organisation and cohesion
Clear development of ideas with adequate use of linking and paragraphing, and
possible use of headings.

Target reader

Would be informed about the holiday.

Would be able to decide whether or not it was a holiday they would want to
experience.

Question 3: Improving education in your country

Content

Description of present provision of education, with an analysis and evaluation of
areas that could be improved, followed by concrete suggestions for bringing about
improvement.

Range
Language of description, analysis, suggestion and recommendation.

Appropriacy of register and format

Register and format appropriate for a proposal — may make use of section
headings.

Register must be consistent throughout.

Organisation and cohesion
Clear organisation of content with adequate use of linking and paragraphing.

Target reader
The Minister would have a clear understanding of the ideas put forward.

Question 4: ‘T’ve always wanted to learn how to...’
Content
Description of the particular skill the writer wants to acquire, plus an explanation

of what is attractive about this skill. Description of what the writer would do with
this skill.

Range
Language of description.

Test 4 Key



=== Page 85 ===

Test 4 Key

Appropriacy of register and format
Register and format appropriate for a magazine article. Possible use of section
headings.

Organisation and cohesion
Ideas clearly organised. Adequate use of paragraphing and linking.

Target reader
Would have a clear idea of what skill the writer wanted to learn and what they
would do with it.

Question S(a): The Accidental Tourist

Content

Clear reference to the book chosen.

Recommendation of the book leading to emphasis on portrayal of Alexander and
his relationship with his mother, Muriel, and with Macon.

Range

Language of description, narration and recommendation. Some language of
description and narration relating to the characters in question and their
relationships.

Appropriacy of register and format

Formal letter.

Organisation and cohesion ;

Clear presentation and development of ideas with appropriate linking of
paragraphs from the introduction to the main body of the letter and the
conclusion.

Target reader a.
Would know whether the novel would be suitable for the proposed exhibition.

Question 5(b): The Day of the Triffids

Content

Clear reference to the book chosen.
Description of the dramatic events in the story, and a description of the impact on
the characters.

Range

Language of description and narration.

Appropriacy of register and format

Consistent and appropriate style for that of a report.
Organisation and cohesion

Clear presentation and development of ideas, with appropriate linking and
paragraphing. May make use of section headings. Clear conclusion.

Target reader
Would be informed about the events and characters in the novel.

150

Test 4 Key
Question S(c): Our Man in Havana
Content
Close reference to the book chosen.
Reference to how the relationship develops over the three visits Wormold makes to
Dr Hasselbacher’s flat.
Range
Language of description, narration and evaluation.
Appropriacy of register and format
Register appropriate to an article for a literary magazine.
Organisation and cohesion
Clear presentation and development of ideas. The account of the three visits can be
dealt with together or separately. Appropriate linking and paragraphing required.
Clear conclusion.
Target reader
Would have a clear idea of the characters of Wormold and Dr Hasselbacher, and
how their relationship develops.
Paper3 Use of English (1 hour 30 minutes)
Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)
1 to 2 its 3 giving / considering 4 but / yet / (al)jthough 5 more
6 put 7 Despite 8 with 9 into 10 addition 11 should
12 as 13 not 14 one 15 far
Part 2 (one mark for each correct answer)
16 technological 17 anxieties 18 unquestionably 19 assumption
20 destructive 21 overwhelmingly 22. beings 23 pessimistically
24 imperfections 25 heights
Part 3 (two marks for each correct answer)
26 cleared 27 state 28 set 29 remain 30 claimed 31 fall
Part 4 (one mark for each correct section)
32. being driven by Paul’s son (1) + at the time (1)
33 it not been for Nick’s advice (1) + I would / Pd (1)
34 no point / time / stage (1) + did the police (actually) (ever) accuse (1)
35 much /a lot /a great deal to choose (1) + between (either of) (1)
36 is a total ban (1) + on (you/ your) smoking (1)
37 makes (1) + no difference to Jenny (1)
38 improvement (1) + in the way the football team played / performed (1)
39 singled out the school library (1) + for criticism (1)

151


=== Page 86 ===

Test 4 Key

Part § (questions 40-43 two marks for each correct answer)

40 doom-mongers ;
44 the way in which old jobs are replaced by a greater number of new jobs
because of changes in technology
42 innovations
43 Bill seems to be very interested in new technologies, so it’s a surprise to find he
uses something which is so old-fashioned
44 (one mark for each content point, up to ten marks for summary skills)
The paragraph should include the following points:
i technology doesn’t necessarily lead to unemployment - PART 1
ii technology doesn’t lead to low incomes .
iii. new technologies don’t completely replace old ones
iv people sometimes prefer to keep old technologies

Extract 1
Paper 4 Listening (40 minutes approximately) :
Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)
iC 2B 38 4A 5C 6A 7B 8A
Part 2 (one mark for each correct answer)
9 field training 10 tent 11 volcano (called Mount Erebus)
42 (flat (and) white) plain 13 roof (made out of lots of snow) ;
14 iaboratories 15 month’s salary 16 clothing / clothes (on display)
17 heroic failures
Part 3 (one mark for each correct answer)
18 B 19 A 20 D 21C 22 C
Part 4 (one mark for each correct answer)
23 B 24 B 25 M 26 M 27 B 28 F

Extract 2

Transcript Certificate of Proficiency in English Listening Test. Test 4.
I’m going to give you the instructions for this test.

Pll introduce each part of the test and give you time to look at the
questions.

At the start of each piece you'll hear this sound:
tone
You'll hear each piece twice.

Remember, while you’re listening, write your answers on the question

paper.

152

Test 4 Key

You'll have five minutes at the end of the test to copy your answers onto the
separate answer sheet.

There will now be a pause. You must ask any questions now, because you
must not speak during the test.

[pause]
Now open your question paper and look at Part One.

[pause]

You'll hear four different extracts. For questions 1 to 8, choose the answer
(A, B or C) which fits best according to what you hear. There are two
questions for each extract.

[pause]
tone

And now to American composer Carl Ruggies, who is still, years after his death, a
total enigma. He worked at an incredibly slow pace, discarded far more than he
kept, and has left us barely enough works to fill two CDs. Ruggles by name and
rugged by nature, he was truly a man of the great outdoors. And he was never
one to mince his words when commenting on his fellow musicians. He said of the
French composer Debussy, ‘There’s nothing wrong with him that twe weeks in the
open air wouldn’t cure!’ and of the great romantic German composer Brahms,
‘Why does he always hide behind all those musical devices? Why doesn’t he
come out and show us he’s a man?’ Here now is an orchestral piece of his, called
‘Men and Angels.’ It has a chequered history, as Ruggies originally wrote it in
41920 and then destroyed paris of it, so it was later revised. It is played here by
members of the...

[pause]

tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

[pause]

tone

... it’s a French novel, a worthy first novel, and | was fascinated with this because
it’s about the friendship between two women, something which isn’t often written
about, and also two very different women. The narrator is in her thirties with two
children, and she writes for a living and needs a babysitter. The girl she winds up
with, who comes to her through various friends, could not be more different. So it’s
a novel about differences; the girl, who is seen to be feckless and lacking in any
sense of duty, and the narrator, who is bound up in her work to the exclusion of
virtually everything else. Although that leads you to the question of the nature, |
mean, what is work?

153


=== Page 87 ===

est 4 Key

ixtract 3

Extract 4

Woman:

Man:

Woman:
Man:

Woman:

154

The themes | really enjoyed but, unfortunately, | don’t think the translation = Man:
works — | can’t get any sense of the women’s social context — | felt they were :
locked in a beautiful white cube somewhere and that, if only | understood where : Woman:
they were, | might have a better handle on them. | feel the translator was too -
concerned with putting his own stamp on the work. Man:
[pause]
tone me Woman:

ing i : Man:

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]
[pause]
tone

Sociologically speaking, bags are an interesting feature of modern society. How
we carry them is important. They’re carried in the-hand, on the crook of the arm,
over the shoulder, on the back, in the form of pockets. Bags in fact are a way of
keeping and displaying connections between our front and other parts of us, less
visible, more vulnerable. A recent trend on the High Street was for girls to wear
exquisitely functionless little rucksacks in the middle of their backs.
We often carry our cash, credit cards and other valuables in bags of one form : PART 2
or another, so they can show wealth and buying power. However, they also a
symbolise poverty and redundancy. The expression ‘to give someone the sack’ a
probably dates from 17* century France. In those days workmen provided their ae
own tools and carried them in a bag, sac in French, which they took away with oe
them upon leaving. So the word sack evolved from referring to the container for -
the workman's prized possessions, to the associated action of leaving a job, with :
the emphasis on unwilling departure. : Presenter:

[pause]

tone Richard
ichard:
[The recording is repeated.]

[pause]
[pause]
tone

You know {| don’t really enjoy going to the cinema anymore. | mean they spend
millions now on making films and for what?

Mmm, that level of expenditure seems to pay dividends. Cinema audiences have
changed, and it looks to me as if most films just try to appeal to mass audiences.
Yes, they seem to make them to a format.

It’s ‘oh, a disaster to overcome and then all live happily ever after’. Anything
remotely sophisticated never makes it to the screen.

Well, they say cinema audiences have changed and it looks to me as if they’re
just trying to appeal to the lowest common denominator. Mind you, you still get a
good cross-section going.

Test 4 Key

The ones | do enjoy are based on true-life stories. At least you feel you’re seeing
something real.

Hmm... I’m not sure about that. They always twist the facts to make it more
exciting | suppose.

Yeah, but | bet they do it because otherwise anybody in the story who is still
around could see themselves really badly set up on screen — and would probably
take them to court. (laughs)

Yes... Anyway, real life is just much more mundane, isn’t it?

Well, | don’t think anyone would pay to see a film of my life.

[pause]

tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

That’s the end of Part One.
Now turn to Part Two.

[pause]

You will hear a scientist talking about his first visit to the Antarctic. For
questions 9 to 17, complete the sentences with a word or short phrase.

You now have forty-five seconds in which to look at Part Two.
{pause]
tone

Dozens of scientists travel to the Antarctic every year to gather information on a
range of subjects. Richard Hollingham is one of those scientists and he’s here
today to tell us about his first trip south and the survival course he and all other
scientists have to go through when they arrive in the Antarctic.

Well, the first day was spent getting accustomed to the sub-zero temperatures,
which meant sliding down a glacier on our bottoms followed by a night sleeping
out on the snow. This is what they call field training and anyone who has to spend
significant periods of time working away from the main bases has to do it. And |
really needed this training because on that first trip | was heading to an area of
sea ice, where | would have to spend three months, in a tent! Can you imagine?
This was going to be quite an experience.

Anyway, the setting for our first day’s training was in the shadow of Mount
Erebus, a volcano on the edge of the Ross ice shelf. When | was there, a few
wisps of sulphurous smoke rose from the summit of the crater. Behind us was a
glacier and ahead a flat white plain which went all the way to the South Poie. The
first day’s training culminated in the construction of snow shelters. We were lucky
with the weather. It was around minus ten and bright sun. There were twelve of us
on this course and we split into teams and each team opted for a different type of
shelter. The Canadians chose the igloo type, the New Zealanders the ‘dig through
a pile of snow’ option and we went for a trench. We foolishly thought it would be
the easiest. So we set to work and after a couple of hours, it was beautiful, it was

155



=== Page 88 ===

Test 4 Key

PART 3

156

deep and long but unfortunately far too wide. Everyone else had resounding
success with their efforts but we were miserable failures. The idea was that what
we'd dug should then be able to take a roof, but no matter how hard we tried, we
couldn't get enough snow in blocks to bridge the gap. So in the end all we had
was a long hole and that’s how we came io sleep outside at night in one of the
coldest places in the worid.

This wasn’t exactly the start we’d hoped for and we wistfully remembered what
we'd seen of base camp ait McMurdoch Sound; it was more like a town. Of course,
there are the laboratories, but it’s even got cable television. Society on base is
fascinating. There’s a black market in what at first seem very unlikely things.
Things like newspapers and mineral water can change hands for considerable
amounis of money; there’s a rumour that salad greens, the most sought-after
thing which are only occasionally shipped in, can fetch up to a month’s salary for a
dinner’s worth.

The whole area around the base camp is full of reminders of some of the
earliest explorers to that region; people like the British explorers, Shackleton and
Scott. In fact, a few miles up the coast, the hut which Shackleton and Scott stayed
in has still got the clothing they wore on display. Further on again, there’s a base
called the Scott Base and it’s full of photographs of him, you know he lost his life
on the return journey from the South Pole. The odd thing is there are no pictures
of the man who actually got to the South Pole first, a Norwegian called Amundsen.
| put this to a Norwegian on our survival course and he said Amundsen made it all
look so easy whereas Scott had made it look much harder, the stuff of legends.
So we carried on that British tradition of making things seem hard. Our training
officer labelled us the ‘heroic failures’ because he’d never seen anybody get a
shelter so wrong despite putting so much effort into it.

[pause]

Now you'll hear Part Two again.
tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

That's the end of Part Two.

Now turn to Part Three.

[pause]

You will hear part of a radio interview with a social worker. For questions
18 to 22, choose the answer (A, B, C or D) which fits best according to
what you hear.

You now have one minute in which to look at Part Three.
[pause]

tone

Presenter:

Tim Jarman:

Presenter:
Tim Jarman:

Presenter:
Tirn Jarman:

Presenter:

Tim Jarman:

Presenter:
Tim Jarman:

Presenter:

Test 4 Key

in 1980 Tim Jarman left a comfortable university post for the insalubrious
Northdown council estate, where housing is provided for ihe unemployed and
those with low incomes. Here he set up a project to provide youth amenities. Tim,
why did you give up your position at a university for a job on an estate?

Well, | was writing a book about social policy at the time, and | felt a bit of a
hypocrite writing about poverty, telling people who work with the underprivileged
what to do and not doing it myself. So | managed to gei a grant from a charity,
who heiped me set up the Northdown Project.

When you got there, you moved into a house, an old doctor’s surgery?

Yes. | didn’t really know what I was going to do, except that i was going to be
rooted in the community. | was fortunate in making a friendship with a local
teenager. We just knocked on doors, and said, ‘Whai do you think we should do?’
Most people said, ‘Do something about the kids in the street.’ The kids in the
street were saying, ‘It's boring, we need things to do,’ and out of that came very
extensive youth clubs, which for the first few years, in fact, met in my house.
What did the youngsters do there?

Very ordinary things. You know, table-tennis, snooker, ball games. It was very
crowded in my house, of course, and later on we found somewhere larger. But |
think the essence was that it was their place. And there was an old greenhouse,
just a lean-to against our house, and about 15 teenagers took that over as their
den. And they came every night and met up with their friends there. So they were
kept out of trouble, but they weren't having adults breathing down their neck.
That’s what counted, | think.

After 10 years there, you moved away, but you went back to Northdown later,
didn’t you, to see how these teenagers had got on? What'd happened to them?
Well, ?'d found a way of measuring the likelihood of their getting into trouble. When
they first carne to us, most of them were brought up in difficult circumstances, had
problems at school, were in trouble with the police and so on. | set up a kind of
tisk table and worked out that 39% were at high risk of future unemployment,
crime and unstable relationships. But the encouraging feature is that, now in their
30s, the majority of the youngsters have kept out of trouble, are in work and enjoy
stable relationships. So the prediction was wrong, because something intervened
to set things right. I’m not claiming our project was the whole factor, because
Clearly the availability of jobs, finding the right partner, making a good relationship
were important, but all the 50 youngsters we interviewed said the project played a
major part in their lives.

So, is there a formula you think could be applied elsewhere?

Yes, the long-term nature of it, the combination of youth clubs and having social
workers resident in the area who really get to know the young people. That’s the
core of it. The trouble is, our kind of project's no longer in the mainstream. Modern
projects are very different, because the authorities are much keener on swiit
intervention, on targeting youngsters with problems, not treating them on a
neighbourhood basis, a quick fix, in other words.

| know you're critical of the initiatives some governments are adopting, giving
people advice and counselling on how to be good parents.

[pause]

157


=== Page 89 ===

Test 4 Key

PART 4

Mary:
Frank:
Mary:
Frank:

Mary:
Frank:

Mary:
Frank:

Mary:
Frank:
Mary:
Frank:
Mary:
Frank:
Mary:

Frank:

Mary:

158

Now you'll bear Part Three again.
tone
[The recording is repeated.]

[pause]
That’s the end of Part Three.

Now turn to Part Four.
[pause]

You will bear part of a conversation in which two neighbours, Mary and
Frank, are discussing current developments in museums. For questions 23 to
28, decide whether the opinions are expressed by only one of the speakers,
or whether the speakers agree. Write M for Mary, F for Frank, or B for
both, where they agree.

You now have thirty seconds in which to look at Part Four.
[pause]
tone

How was your weekend, Frank? Do anything nice?

Yes Mary, | did actually. We all went to the Science Museum.

| shouldn’t think your children were very pleased at being taken round a lot of
dusty exhibits.

Well, | know that’s what people think, but lots of museums are really interesting
these days.

Well, if you say so.

| know why you’re sceptical. | remember when museums used to be just row after
row of glass cabinets full of rocks or dead insects...

Aren’t they still?

They're more interactive now. Kids can press buttons and touch things. It’s really
child-friendly.

But | thought museums were for learning.

Education doesn’t have to be dull or stuffy, does it?

Not nowadays, at any rate. But why did you choose the Science Museum? Your
children aren't very keen on science, are they?

Well, that’s the point. | wanted to give them some encouragement, sort of sugar
the pill. Actually, | found them a good booklet on the museum in the local library
first and so they got interested in the exhibits before we went.

That must have been helpful.

Mmm, and it saves time when you actually visit, if you know what to focus on.
What about the cost? Museums charge quite a lot now, don’t they? They were all
free years ago, when | took my children.

Well, that’s all a bit up in the air at the moment. Some places are still free, some
just charge £1 for adults, and some charge quite a hefty sum.

| can see that charging is a thorny issue. But the collections in museums are
national assets. So everyone should be able to have equal access to them,
shouldn't they?

Frank:
Mary:
Frank:
Mary:

Frank:

Mary:

Frank:

Mary:

Frank:
Mary:

Frank:

Mary:

Test 4 Key

There are other implications, like the theory that people are more likely to value
something if they have to pay for it.

Um, but let’s look at public libraries. They're a national resource too.

So?

Well, it would be quite wrong if the local authorities started charging for access to
them, claiming it would make children appreciate books more.

But museums have to put on special evenis to attract more people, but books in a
library don’t change that much. And you know, some museums have an outreach
system now, which | think is quite a positive move.

Does that mean they take dinosaur skeletons and paintings round the couniry in a
van!

It would need a very large van for a dinosaur! No they send some of their
collection, paintings etc. out to schools, libraries, community centres on temporary
loan.

Oh, I see. Well, it is a long way to the big museums from little towns like this.
Hmm, | suppose that’s quite a creative use of resources.

Indeed.

What was the building itself like? | saw a programme on TV about a new museum
in the North, and the architecture was lovely, very light and airy.

And I'm sure the sort of building really influences how you experience the
contents.

Well, perhaps I’d better see the Science Museum for myself.

[pause]

Now you'll hear Part Four again.
tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

That’s the end of Part Four.

There will now be a pause of five minutes for you to copy your answers
onto.the separate answer sheet. Be sure to follow the numbering of all the
questions. I'll remind you when there is one minute left, so that you’re sure
to finish in time.

[pause]
You have one more minute left.
[pause]

That’s the end of the test. Please stop now. Your supervisor will now collect
all the question papers and answer sheets.

159


=== Page 90 ===

Sample answer sheet: Paper 1

Universrry of CAMBRIDGE
Local Examinations Syndicate

Aw Pee

Candidate Name
Wot already printed write name
in CAPITALS and eumplete the
Candidate No. grid lia peneil

Candidate’s signature

Examination Title
Details

Centre
Supervisor:

if the candidate is ABSENT or has WITHDRAWN shade here =>

Forexample, if you think Bis By
ainewer, ark your answer sheet

ERE INS:

Centre No.

Candidate No.

Examination

Rub out any anewer you.
wish to change.

mie E

ie ip so

Pele,

a

id

u oli

atecr ey

oan

aloile

bg) A BOUSlCUDUCEECFCCG

Boo pone

Tele
mas

cee

160

© UCLES K&]

Sample answer sheet: Paper 3

| University of Camprince
Local Examinations Syndicate

Candidate Name
not elreedy printed write name
in CAPITALS and complete the
Cangiaate No. grid tin pencil

Candidate's signature

Examination Title

Centre

Supervisor:

if the candidate is ABSENT or has WITHDRAWN shade here =

© a

instructions
Use 4 soft PENCIL
(B or HB).

Rub out any answer
you wish #0 change.
with an erase,

For Parts 1, 2 and 3:
While your anawer
clearly In CAPITAL
LETTERS.

Write one letter in each
box,

For example:

Answer Parts 4 and §
on the second answer
sheet.

Write your answer
neatly in the spaces
provided,

You de not have to
write in capital letters for
Parts 4 and 5.

| sonsseminennnn

Centre No.

Candidate Ne.

:

e, o
Examination iS =
Details 3 : _

4 =

&

18 ms

Zk

is,

@

@UCLES KX]
161



=== Page 91 ===

Sample answer sheet: Paper 3

162

© UCLES K&J

Sample answer sheet: Paper 3

Unversity of CAMBRIDGE
Local Examinations Syndicate

U
LUT

S /\ [Nl

Candidate Name

If not already printad write name
in CAPITALS and complete the
Candidate No. grid (in pone

Candidate's signature

Examination Title
Centre
Supervisor:

if the candidate is ABSENT or has WITHDRAWN shade here co

@

Centre No.

Candidate No. Leet ick
oo

Examination Saas —

Detail: Ara 2

stalls ge)
goo
(3 SE
(BBS. om
12. pas 2,
Boe
L835 Ste

<—ooTT

ee

a ae i ae
a :

ae oe a

S258

eee

OUCLES KRY
163


=== Page 92 ===

ample answer sheet: Paper 3

ana aauegnS pay us Spa Nag esRRAgT sas StaeuspnpeeaGe Aran useane cae ecle

Examiner sumber:
Team and Position

© UCLES K&J

Sample answer sheet: Paper 4

—

Local Examinations Syndicate

1
|
|

1
S 4 Y |
LN.
= 5
Candidate Name Centre No.
if not already printed write name
in CAPITALS end complete the
Canciete No. grid (in penel)
Candidate's signature Candidate No.
Examination Title Examination —
Detaiis
Centre =—
Supervisor:
if the candidate is ABSENT or has WITHDRAWN shade here oy

Instructions
Use a soff PENCIL (B or HB).

For Parts 1 and 3:

Mark ONE letter only for each question

For exampie, f you think 5 is the right answer,
mark your answer sheet like this:

For Part 2:
Write your answer clearly in
the space like this:

For Part 4:
Write ONE letter only, like this:

Rub oul any answer you wish fo change with an eraser.

w

aoe
:

0.

esiee

© UCLES K&} Besse

165



=== Page 93 ===

CERTIFICATE OF PROFICIENCY IN ENGLI

‘Cambridge University Press is the only official publisher of CPE papers

from UCLES - an essential part of any Proficiency preparation course.
Do you want to approach the Cambridge Certificate of Proficiency in English (CPE) with:

confidence?:Then you need to familiarise yourself thoroughly with the new format and~
content of the revised'exam = and you need to practise examination techniques using “
genuine material such: as these CPE papers which have been specially prepared for
publication by the University of Cambridge. Local Examinations Syndicate (UCL S$).
They provide the most authentic examination practice available:

.Cambridge Certificate of Proficiency in English 2 contains:

+. four model: papers from UCLES. which reflect the most recent changes to the”
: Proficiency exam :

*~an-informative introduction which gives an overview of the different f papers and 3
question types : :

* photocopiable answers sheets so you.can practise transferring ) your answers. .

- The Student’s Book ‘with answers’ edition also contains a comprehensive section °
answer keys and tapescripts, making it suitable for self-study. The accompanying
Teacher's Book provides further information about the new form tof the
and. a. clear. insight into marking and grading illustrated cen
. by authentic sample‘answers.: It also contains tapescripts © : — sie
. : ‘and answer keys; making it a valuable, all-round teacher's CAMBRIDGE
; won : resource. <= : a os aoe UNIVERSTIPY PRESS

Wwvecambridge.org

ISBN “MEIN iletteimat

521"751094
