

=== Page 1 ===

eee Past Papers =

Aaa yea
;

CERTIFICATE

ENGLISH

EXAMINATION PAPERS FROM
UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE
ESOL EXAMINATIONS



=== Page 2 ===

Cambridge Certificate
of Proficiency in English
4

WITH ANSWERS

Examination papers from
University of Cambridge
ESOL Examinations:
English for Speakers of
Other Languages

= CAMBRIDGE

ae UNIVERSITY PRESS


=== Page 3 ===

Contents

Thanks and acknowledgements 4
Introduction 5

Test 1 Paper1 Reading 8
Paper 2 Writing 18
Paper 3 Use of English 20
Paper 4 Listening 28
Paper5 Speaking 33

Test 2 Paper1 Reading 34
Paper 2 Writing 44
Paper 3 Use of English 46
Paper 4 Listening 54
Paper5 Speaking 59

Test 3 Paper 1 Reading 60
Paper2 Writing 70
Paper3 Use of English 72
Paper 4 Listening 80
Paper5 Speaking 85

Test 4 Paper1 Reading 86
Paper2 Writing 96
Paper3 Use of English 98
Paper 4 Listening 106
Paper5 Speaking 111

Test 1 Paper 5 frames 112
Test 2 Paper 5 frames 115
Test 3 Paper 5 frames 119
Test 4 Paper 5 frames 123

Marks and results 128

Test 1 Key and transcript 140
Test 2 Key and transcript 152
Test 3 Key and transcript 163
Test 4 Key and transcript 175

Sample answer sheets 187

Visual materials for Paper 5 colour section


=== Page 4 ===

Thanks and acknowledgements

The author and publishers are grateful to the authors,
publishers and others who have given permission for
the use of copyright material identified in the text. It
has not always been possible to identify the source of
material used or to contact the copyright holders and
in such cases the publishers would welcome
information from the copyright owners.

For the extract on p. 10: adapted from ‘Visible energy
proves a sensual wonder’ by Lynn MacRitchie, The
Financial Times, 22 July 2000, © The Financial Times
Ltd; for the extract on p. 11: from David Hockney by
Marco Livingstone, © 1981, 1987 and 1996 Thames
& Hudson Ltd, London. Reprinted by kind
permission of the publisher; for the extract on p. 13:
from pp. 4 and 6, History of Art — 3rd Edition by
Marcia Pointon, published by Routledge, 1997.
Reprinted by permission of T&F Informa; for the
extract on p. 16: from “Words of a Feather’ by Paul
Evans, published by BBC Worldwide Ltd, March
2.000; for the extract on p. 36: from ‘A Luddite’s
Lament’ by Simon Jenkins, The Times, 24 January,
1998, © NI Syndication; for the extract on p. 37:
from Whit by lain Banks, published by Abacus.
Reprinted by permission of Time Warner Book Group
UK and Mic Cheetham Agency, © Iain Banks 1996;
for the extract on pp. 40-41: from Caught in the Light
by Robert Goddard, published by Bantam Press. Used
by permission of The Random House Group Limited
and The Peters, Fraser and Dunlop Group Limited ©
Robert and Vaunda Goddard; for the text on p. 62:
adapted from ‘A swan song for my brief brush with
celebrity’ by Richard Eyre, published in the Guardian,
23 December 2000, and the text on p. 65: adapted
from ‘Perfect Theatre’ by Richard Eyre published in
the Observer, 10 December 2000, © Richard Eyre; for

the text on pp. 66-67: adapted from ‘Joanna’s lessons’
by Peter Kingston, published by the Guardian, 26
May 2000, © the Guardian; for the text on p. 72:
from the cover of Food for a Future, by Jon Wynne
Tyson. Reprinted by permission of HarperCollins
Publishers Ltd. © Jon Wynne Tyson, 1988: for the
extract on p. 88: adapted from ‘Getting away from it
all’ by Alain de Botton, published in The Sunday
Times, 2 July 2000. Reprinted by permission of The
PFD Group Ltd, © Alain de Botton; for the text on

p. 89: from Flying Visits by Clive James, published by
Jonathan Cape. Reprinted by permission of
Macmillan UK Ltd, © Clive James, 1984; for the
extract on p. 94: fram Hare Brain, Tortoise Mind by
Guy Claxton. Reprinted by permission of
HarperCollins Publishers Led, © Guy Claxton, 1997.

The publishers are grateful to the following for
permission to include photographs:

AA World Travel Library for p. C7 (t & b); Corbis
for pp. C8 (b), C9 (t & mr); Empics for p. C9 (b);
Getty Images for pp. C8 (t), C9 (ml); Imagestate for
p. C6 (b); Life File Photo Library for pp. C5 (c),

C7 ({m); Bryan Lowry / Alamy for p. C4 (tl); Jeff
Morgan / Alamy for pp. C4 (b), C6 (t);
Photolibrary.com for p. Cé (m); Popperfoto.com for
p. CS (b); Punchstock / Digital Vision for p. C8 (m);
Rex Features for p, C3; Worldwide Picture Library /
Alamy for p. C4 (tr).

Picture research by Kevin Brown

Cover design by Dunne Scully

The recordings which accompany this book were
made at Studio AVP, London.


=== Page 5 ===

Introduction

This collection of four complete practice tests comprises past papers from the University of
Cambridge ESOL Examinations Certificate of Proficiency in English (CPE) examination;
students can practise these tests on their own or with the help of a teacher.

The CPE examination is part of a group of examinations developed by Cambridge ESOL
called the Cambridge Main Suite. The Main Suite consists of five examinations which have
similar characteristics but are designed for different levels of English language ability. Within
the five levels, CPE is at Level C2 in the Council of Europe’s Common European Framework
of Reference for Languages: Learning, teaching, assessment. It has also been accredited by the
Qualifications and Curriculum Authority in the UK as a Level 3 ESOL certificate in the
National Qualifications Framework. The CPE examination is recognised by the majority of
British universities for English language entrance requirements, and is taken by candidates in
over 100 countries throughout the world. Around 75% of the candidates are 25 years of age
or under, whilst around 12% are 31 years old or over.

—_———
Council of Europe
Framework Level

UK National
Qualifications
Framework Level

Examination

CAE Cy 5
Certificate in Advanced English 7
—+—__—
FCE
First Certificate in English B2 1
PET
Preliminary English Test Bl Entry 3
KET
Key English Test A2 Entry 2

Further information

The information contained in this practice book is designed to be an overview of the exam. For
a full description of all of the above exams including information about task types, testing
focus and preparation, please see the relevant handbooks which can be obtained from
Cambridge ESOL at the address below or from the website at: www.CambridgeESOL.org

University of Cambridge ESOL Examinations Telephone: +44 1223 553355
1 Hills Road Fax: +44 1223 460278
Cambridge CB1 2EU e-mail: ESOLHelpdesk@ucles.org.uk

United Kingdom


=== Page 6 ===

Introduction

The structure of CPE: an overview
The CPE examination consists of five papers:

Paper 1 Reading 1 hour 30 minutes

This paper consists of four parts with 40 questions, which take the form of
three multiple-choice tasks and a gapped text task. Part 1 contains three short
texts, Part 2 contains four short texts and Parts 3 and 4 each contain one
longer text. The texts are taken from fiction, non-fiction, journals, magazines,
newspapers, and promotional and informational materials. This paper is
designed to test candidates’ ability to understand the meaning of written
English at word, phrase, sentence, paragraph and whole text level.

Paper 2 Writing 2 hours

This paper consists of two writing tasks in a range of formats (e.g. letter,
report, review, article, essay, proposal), Candidates are asked to complete two
tasks, writing between 300 and 350 words for each. Part 1 (Question 1)
consists of one compulsory task based on instructions and a short text or texts,
Part 2 (Questions 2-5) consists of one task which candidates select from a
choice of four. Question 5 has a task on each of the three set texts. Candidates
choose one of the tasks in Question 5, if they want to answer on a set text,
Assessment is based on achievement of task, range and accuracy of vocabulary

and grammatical structures, organisation and appropriacy of register and
format.

Paper 3 Use of English 1 hour 30 minutes

This paper consists of five parts with 44 questions. These take the form of an
open cloze, a word formation task, gapped sentences, key word transformations
and two texts with comprehension questions and a summary writing task. The
two texts are from different sources and represent different treatments of the
same topic. This paper is designed to assess candidates’ ability to demonstrate

knowledge and control of the English language system by setting tasks at both
text and sentence level.

Paper 4 Listening 40 minutes (approximately)

This paper consists of four parts with 28 questions, which take the form of two
multiple-choice tasks, a sentence-completion task and a three-way matching
task. Part 1 contains four short extracts and Parts 2 to 4 each contain one
longer text. The texts are audio-recordings based on a variety of sources
including interviews, discussions, lectures, conversations and documentary
features. The paper is designed to assess candidates? ability to understand the
meaning of spoken English, to extract information from a spoken text and to
understand speakers’ attitudes and opinions.

Paper S Speaking 19 minutes

The Speaking test consists of three parts, which take the form of an interview
section, a collaborative task and individual long turns with follow-up
discussion. The standard test format is two candidates and two examiners.


=== Page 7 ===

Grading
The overall CPE grade is based on the total score gained in all five papers. It is
not necessary to achieve a satisfactory level in all five papers in order to pass
the examination. Certificates are given to candidates who pass the examination
with grade A, B or C. A is the highest. The minimum successful performance in
order to achieve a grade C corresponds to about 60% of the total marks. D
and E are failing grades. Every candidate receives a Statement of Results which
includes a graphical profile of their performance in each paper and shows their
relative performance in each one. Each paper is weighted to 40 marks.
Therefore, the five CPE papers total 200 marks, after weighting.

For further information on grading and results, go to the website (see
page 5}.

Introduction


=== Page 8 ===

Test 1
PAPER1 READING (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1

For questions 1-18, read the three texts below and decide which answer (A, B, C or D) best fits
each gap.

Mark your answers on the Separate answer sheet.

Fashion

Fashion is often seen as a modern phenomenon, entirely (1) .... upon nineteenth- and twentieth-
century capitalism for its development. Most historians of fashion are at (2) .... to point out, though,
that fashion, at least in the (3) .... of style and design, has a very long history. They often (4) .... the
rise of the market and mercantile trade in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries as their starting
point.

As societies have developed in complexity, populations have expanded, and multiple technologies
for producing an increasing variety of clothing and physical adornment have been discovered, so
the meanings attached to dress have also increased in their complexity and_ significance.
Consequently, it is difficult to say with any (5) .... of certainty today what any item of clothing or
adornment actually means. For example, a man’s suit, (6) .... an indicator of the most extreme
uniformity, actually conveys very differing meanings in different contexts and to different people.

1 A responsible B subject C conditionai D dependent
2 A effort B pains C agony D trouble

3 A scale B frame C sense D aspect

4 A take B get C put D make

5 A ratio B element C degree D shadow

6 A definitely B supposedly C evidently D obviously



=== Page 9 ===

Nee eee

Paper1 Reading

Writer

Newspaper reports of publishers in (7) .... wars over whizz-kid manuscripts have resulted in a skewed
idea of what life is like for your average novelist. Down at my end of the business — i.e. not exactly
topping the best-seller lists — there are two ways of making ends (8) ..... The wisest among us write
in the evenings and have other full-time jobs that will still be there even if the book doesn't immediately
get (9) .... up and turned into a film. Those such as myself, however, are literary odd-jobbers, (10) ....
on a bit of teaching, the occasional workshop and articles like this. | have (11) .... tell of an in-house
writing opportunity offered by a chocolate factory, but I've never managed to get anything like that.
Somehow, though, by (12) .... of juggling part-time jabs and credit cards and also, more often than
not, thanks to the generosity of those names you find in Acknowledgements, the novel gets written.

7 A petitioning B bidding C tendering D proffering

8 A join B meet C connect D tie

9 A swallowed B gobbled C sucked D snapped
10 A subsisting B enduring C abiding D prevailing
11 A noted B heard C received D experienced
12 A way B attempt C dint D reason

Sudden Fame

The small (13) .... we were performing at around the country were all beginning to sell (14) .... and
extra bouncers were having to be called in to hold back the growing legion of screaming girls. We
found ourselves having to use secret entrances to the village halls and ballrooms we were playing
to prevent ourselves being mobbed by fans. On the few nights a week when we were not working,
we found it difficult to leave the house without being pursued through the streets by adoring
followers. In a (15) .... of days, we had been transformed into celebrities. Our moves were monitored
by our admirers and all of our needs (16) .... for by our management and other interested parties.
Even though the shyness that had always accompanied me never quite went away, it was replaced
by a strange naive over-confidence that only naturally shy people who have been thrust into similar
situations can (17) .... to. In short, { was emotionally totally out of my (18).....

13 A sites B venues C scenes D abodes
14 A out B up C off D on

15 A course B question C spell D matter

16 A answered B catered C afforded D granted
17 A identify B relate C ally D connect
18 A depth B extent C level D reach


=== Page 10 ===

Test 1

Part 2

You are going to read four extracts which are all concerned in some way with art. For questions
19-26, choose the answer (A, B, C or D) which you think fits best according to the text.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

Kinetic Art

Rejoice — the well-nigh impossible has happened: London’s austere Hayward Gallery
has been transformed into a place full of wonder. And not, thankfully, by some huge-
budget, mega-hyped, multi-media extravaganza, but by a charmingly idiosyncratic
investigation into an almost forgotten aspect of the last 60 years. A new exhibition
traces the history of kinetic art — that is art which is concerned with movement — in
the twentieth century. In the process, it reveals that making artworks which either
move by themselves or investigate the idea of movement in some way has been a
consistent if largely unrecognised theme of some of the most fascinating creative
activity of this century. And not only that — the marvellous range of paintings and
drawings, documents and films on kinetic art assembled by curator Guy Brett, who has
made a life-long study of the subject, are presented largely unmediated by text. Visitors,
unharried by explanations, are left to have the pleasure of making connections and
discoveries for themselves.

19 The writer likes the fact that the new art exhibition seems

perplexing.
colourful.
unpretentious.
unambitious.

CooODUDY

20 Which of the following does the writer say about kinetic art?

It is stimulating social change.

It has not received the attention it deserves.

It is likely to become more popular in the future.

It has informed some better known works from the mainstream of art.

com>

10


=== Page 11 ===

21

22

Paper 1

David Hockney

Hockney’s work appeals to a great many people who might otherwise
display little interest in art. It may be that they are attracted to it because it
is figurative and, therefore, easily accessible on one level, or because the
subject matter of leisure and exoticism provides an escape from the
mundanities of everyday life. Perhaps if is not even the art that interests some
people, but Hockney’s engaging personality and the verbal wit that makes
him such good copy for the newspapers. He may, in other words, be popular

for the wrong reasons. But does this negate the possibility that his art has a
serious sense of purpose?

In the view of some respected critics, Hockney is nothing more than an
overrated minor artist. To this one can counter that Hockney might seem
minor because it is unacceptable today to be so popular, rather than
because his work is lacking in substance. Hockney himself is not self-
deluding; he is aware of his limitations and thinks that it is beside the point
to dismiss his work because it does not measure up to an abstract concept
of greatness. Hockney does not claim to be a great artist and is aware that
only posterity can form a final judgement on his stature.

In the first paragraph, the writer considers the possibility that Hockney’s work

is difficult for critics to appreciate.

is not the main reason for his fame.

makes important points about human activity.

does not provide much for journalists to write about.

90WU >

What is Hockney’s own view of his work?

It is not intended to have much substance.

It bears comparison with that of earlier great artists.
Its true value will only become apparent in the future.
It does not define him as a ‘great artist’.

9OU>Y

Reading

11


=== Page 12 ===

Test 1

“Window-shopping’

In the last few years I have seen loads of
exhibitions of contemporary art, and
amongst them brilliance and mediocrity.
What always bugs me, though, are shows
that seem to push an underlying agenda,
suggesting there is a common attitude
among certain artists. Sometimes it works;
we really are made aware of new trends
running through apparently unrelated work.
More often, though, we are alerted to a
dubious angle or a forced concept. This led
me, as a curator, to attempt a show which
stands as an antithesis to this.

Together with seven artists I took over a
space in an empty warehouse. ‘Window-
shopping’ was intended as a collection of
individual artworks that related to each other
purely through the fact that they proclaimed

— an art exhibition

to be art. Sam Cole’s knitted cats went
barmy chasing each other round on a toy
train track. In contrast Matthew Crawley’s
turning on a video camera, opening it up
and poking around in there until it breaks
flickered, flashed and disappeared on the
monitor in the corner. These works certainly
didn’t fit into the ‘an exhibition exploring
the theme of ...’ category, and wouldn’t
usually be seen together in the same show,
but why not? They did not impede each
other and actually, I hope, through their
contrast, gave something to each other. OK,
so T haven’t made any grandiose statements
about the nature of contemporary art
practice, but there probably aren’t any to be
made about what is basically an individual
activity in which artists set their own
parameters.

23 What was the writer making a statement against in the show called ‘Window-shopping’?

a current tendency in some exhibitions
the poor standard of some exhibitions
the cosy insularity of some artists

the political message of some artists

9QOWD>Y

24 What point does the writer make about art in the second paragraph?

12

A Artistic goals are fundamentally elusive.
B tis impossible to reflect reality in art.

C The human spirit should not be limited by artistic rules.
D Creating a work of art is a very personal experience.


=== Page 13 ===

25

26

Paper 1 Reading

Art History

People who enjoy paintings are sometimes reluctant to analyse them for
fear of spoiling the richness and spontaneity of their experience. It has
been suggested that some of the work done by art historians, whose
concern is with theory rather than practice, ignores and indeed denies the
aesthetic experience, the fundamental pleasure of looking, as well as the
very special act of artistic creativity. This view is a bit like the notion that
knowing the ingredients of the recipe, recognising the method of cooking
and seeing the utensils employed detracts from the taste of the dish.
Acknowledging the importance of enjoying something does not, of
course, preclude a thorough knowledge of the object that is arousing
pleasure. It might in fact be more pleasurable if we know more about the
object we are viewing. Moreover, pleasure is not a simple matter. The
arousal of our senses — and how we recognise and register it — is itself open
to interrogation. It is also historically located. Why we like particular
characteristics of certain sorts of objects at any one time is not simply the
result of our genes or our own particular personalities but is determined
by values promoted within the society of which we are a part. So, while no
one seeks to underestimate the importance of sensuous and instinctive
responses to art objects, the notion that the sensuous is undermined by the

intellectual is a legacy from a period in the past which promoted art as an
alternative to thought.

In likening art history to food, what is the writer implying?

Only experts should give opinions on works of art.

There is no harm in being fully informed about art history.
Art historians cannot appreciate basic simplicity.

There is a lot of very mundane popular art.

90 UY

What does the writer say in the second paragraph about our reaction to a picture?

It should be based purely on instinct.

It is difficult to be completely objective.

It is purely personal and may simply be wrong.
It stems in part from the beliefs of former times.

i=om: i.

13


=== Page 14 ===

Test 1

Part 3

You are going to read a short story. Seven paragraphs have been removed from the story. Choose
from the paragraphs A-H the one which fits each gap (27-33). There is one extra paragraph which

you do not need to use.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

REMOVAL DAY

With her children now grown, widowed Susan faces leaving the family home

The van said, Susan noticed, ‘Removers of
Distinction’, and indeed, every distinguishing feature
of the house was being removed. Everything which
made it particular was being wrapped in newspaper
and packed in boxes by Fred the removal man, his
enormous fingers like sausages tenderly handling alt
the breakables; and his team of helpers, not so gentle,

When told that they had bought this house, Robert,
then five, had asked thoughtfully, ‘Mum, when you buy
a house, how d’you get it home?’ You could miss a
little boy in the physical presence of the adult he had
become; Robert was here, helping, and in particular
making sure she didn’t let on about the Piano.
Francesca was here too, also helping, in her bossy
way, stubbornly certain that nobody but she, the family
daughter, would be careful enough over a fine
instrument like a Steinway piano.

She could easily imagine.

Left to herself, Susan would have warned the
removers about the piano before accepting the
estimate. Robert had said sternly that it was their
business to see the problem, and their bad luck if they
didn’t. The piano now stood in solitary glory in the
upstairs sitting room, the best room in the house. They
would leave it till last, naturally. Sitting on the bottom

stair, for all the chairs were gone now, she
remembered the time they had arrived.

They brought it up to the turn of the stairs, and down
again, and cut out banister rails, and got it jammed

14

anyway, while little Robert looked on enthralled, and
young Francesca wailed, ‘We can't live in a house
without a piano! We can’t! I'd rather die!’ And of course
they couldn't; not with a musical daughter destined to
be a concert pianist. They had to find a way to get it
in, and a way had been found.

Then, from the quay below the house, where fish were
unloaded from the inshore boats, a little crane was
borrowed, and dragged up the hill by means of the
local farmer's tractor, Finally, the piano was wrapped
in blankets, hooked to the crane and gently swung
safely through the gaping window, while the
entranced children danced with joy at the sight of it.

The children were increasingly too busy to come home
al weekends, and Susan was no longer so mobile in
the house, and puffing as she climbed the stairs. The
thought of the stairs interrupted her daydream. The
banister rails were still not quite parallel; they had not
been put back perfectly all that time ago. She ought to
have warned the removers, surely she ought. But now
it was too late. Any moment now they wouid find it. She
looked around, dazed and panic-stricken,

Truth to tell she was just on the edge of them. How odd
that simply moving things made them matter. Chairs
and cups and things, hundreds of things, that one
never noticed or gave a moment's thought to while
they stayed put, now they were displaced, were full of
pathos, crying out to be cared about — and she would
have cried, in a moment, surely she would.


=== Page 15 ===

It was Robert who laughed first, but then they couldn't
stop laughing, relieved that it was all over. All three of
them, helplessly, leaning against each other, gasping

Paper1 Reading

for breath and laughing more. ‘What's the joke, then?’
asked Fred, but he merely started them off again. So
that, as they went, the three of them, arm in arm down
the path for the last time, the only tears she shed were
tears of laughter.

A Peter, her late husband, had come home to the
: crisis and had resolved it. The piano had been left
in the garden while the other furniture was brought
in — there was much less of it then; they had been
relatively young and hard up. And next day, to
everyone's surprise, a builder had been engaged

to take out the first floor window.

B To the children’s undisguised pleasure, the piano
was miraculously unharmed after its bumpy
journey. As soon as the going was safe,
Francesca celebrated with an impromptu recital
so full of happy relief that it moved her mother to
tears.

C Only just then the piano appeared, lurching at the
top of the stairs, with Fred backing down in front of
it and one of the others behind. It tipped slightly.
‘Easy does it!’ cried Fred, and they carried it
smoothly down the stairs and out of the front door,
and put it down behind the removal van on the
road.

D ‘Are you all right, love?’ Fred was saying. ‘Mind
yourself, it’s just the piano to come now, and then
we'll be on our way’ She moved from the bottom
stair, heart beating. Robert and Francesca had both
appeared, standing in the back of the hallway to
watch. ‘No tears then?’ Fred said, conversationally,

¥

‘She doesn’t look like she’s going to cry on us,
observed Fred. ‘That's something’ ‘Do people
cry?’ Susan asked, intrigued. ‘You'd be surprised)
said Fred. ‘They go around merry as magpies
helping out till it's all in the van, then you look
round and there they are, crying in the middle of
an empty room. They’re fine when we get to the
new place, mind. It's just seeing everything taken
apart that upsets them.

It was a lovely house that she was leaving, an
elegant four-storeyed building overlooking a tiny
harbour. The years she had spent there, the years
of the children growing up and leaving, hung
around in the air, faintly present like agitated dust.

However, the whole process had cost so much it
was months before they could afford to have the
piano professionally tuned. ‘That's that; Peter had
said. ‘That’s there for ever’ But for ever is a long
time.

The day she was living through now was like that
day filmed and run backwards — the piano had
been carried in first. And it had got stuck on the
stairs. For nearly two hours the team of removal
men struggled manfully with it, until it seemed they
would simply have to give up.

15


=== Page 16 ===

Test 1

Part 4

You are going to read an extract from a magazine article. For questions 34-40, choose the answer

(A, B, C or D) which you think fits best according to the text.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

Love them, fear them, worship them; human culture has always had a lot to say about birds.
But what does that say about us? Paul Evans reports

There's a bump, bump, bump coming from the greenhouse as a little brown shuttlecock bounces against the glass. It turns
gut to be a wren: an ominous bird, a bird of portent, augury and divination. Is it Spelling out some sort of message from
a world at the very edges of my imagination? Or is it just a poor bird stuck in a greenhouse?

Depending on your point of view, both could be true. Wrens have been flitting through the undergrowth of British culture
aver since it began. In medieval times, a complicated system of observing the directions in which wrens flew determined
the sort of luck the observer would experience. In modern times, the image of the wren remains in pictures and ceramics
in many British households. Even though the early beliefs may have been watered down or even forgotten, the wren still
has a perch in our consciousness and a nest in our affections. A wood without wrens is a sad, impoverished place.

This is almost certainly because there is a rich vein of folklore running through out relationships with many birds which
reaches back to a time when people read the world around them differently, Where people are, necessarily, hitched more
directly to natural processes for their very survival, they develop an ecological and cultural language through which the
significance of other creatures is communicated. This significance is, of course, prone to cultural shifts that cause major
image changes for the creatures involved. A good example of this is the red kite. During the early sixteenth century, foreign
visitors to London were amazed to see red kites swooping down to take bread from the hands of children, These birds
were protected and valued urban scavengers. But it was not long before they began to be seen as vermin, and as a result
were soon wiped out in most areas apart from Wales. Gradually red kites began to assume a romantic personality linked
to this Celtic stronghold and they have now become totemic birds of British conservation, protected again and
reintraduced with a view to helping them regain their original distribution.

Our relationship with other creatures is more than cultural and goes way back to the evolution of human nature. Though
the first human birdwatchers may have been acutely observant of bird behaviour because it announced approaching
predators, bad weather, and the availability of food, and also offered a supernatural tink to the world of their dreams,
there is more to it. When we ask why birds are so important to us, we are also asking what it is to be us. Flight, song,
freedom — our fascination, envy and emulation of the avian world is surely a measure of our own identity against that of
the wildness of nature. Some might dismiss these feelings as vestigial attachments, useful to us in an earlier phase of our

evolution, irrelevant now. But, like the appendix and wisdom teeth, they're still very much part of us and losing them is
traumatic.

That is probably why, in recent years, birds have become the barometers of environmental change, indicators of ecological
quality: the warning bells of environmentalism. Conservationists in Britain cite the endangering of 30 species, a figure
that is depressing not only because it spells out the loss of feathered curiosities, but because it is a massive cultural loss
too. These birds carry a huge amount of cultural baggage. For example, the skylark, turtle dove and lapwing signify spiritual
love, romantic love and magic. Anyone who has read Shelley's poems, Shakespeare's sonnets and Robert Graves's The
White Goddess will feel more than a tug of remorse at the loss of these once commonplace birds.

Yet while the loss of these birds is lamented, the loss of others which don’t figure in either literature or folklore is virtually
ignored. Folklore is so important. The stories, legends and rhymes which persist through time, with their obscure origins,
constant revisions and reinventions, somehow have a greater living bond with their subjects than cold, scientific terms —
a bond that is strengthened by the everyday language in which they are understood and communicated. This gives them
a power to summon up feelings and attitudes from a consciousness buried under all the stuff of modern life.

Whether we watch wildlife films on TV or birdtables in the backyard, what we're doing and the excitement we get from
what we see cannot adequately be captured by scientific reason. Birds are engaging in ways we still find hard to fathom,
let alone articulate, and so the stories we tell about them seem like ways of interpreting what birds are telling us.

The wren in the greenhouse weaves an intricate knot, tying an imaginary thread between the here and now and a deep,
distant history, holding the free end in its song and escaping into the future — a riddle that keeps me guessing.

16

line 22

line 25

line 30

line 35


=== Page 17 ===

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

Paper 1

In paragraph 2, the writer affirms that the wren

900 >

has been given exaggerated importance.

was once used as an aid to navigation.

has lost its significance as society has become tess superstitious.
is still firmly established in collective memory.

What point is the writer illustrating with the example of the red kite?

oO >

Cc
D

Most birds have symbolic and poetic associations.
Human and avian life are inseparably linked.

A society’s attitude to wildlife is not fixed.

Wildlife can threaten human society with disease.

The writer uses the words ‘there is more to it’ (line 22) to introduce the idea that

0UQWUPY,

With the reference to ‘the appendix and wisdom teeth’ (line 25), the writer is drawing

birds enable us to analyse the nature of human existence.
birds extend our knowledge of evolution.

bird behaviour accurately predicts danger.

bird behaviour is surprisingly similar to human behaviour.

attention to the fact that

UN WU>Y

humans and birds have some common anatomical details.

being separated from deep-rooted emotions can be a painful experience.
humans cannot explain their biological inheritance.

bonding with the natural world is as vital as maintaining physical health.

In what sense do some birds carry ‘a huge amount of cultural baggage’? (line 30)

oom}

They are weighed down with people’s false assumptions.
They are believed to symbolise environmental destruction.
They figure prominently in literature through the ages.
Their disappearance will herald the loss of cultural identity.

Reading

in paragraph 6, the writer draws a comparison between ‘cold, scientific terms’ (line 35) and

>

B
Cc
D

obscure origins.

everyday language.

feelings and attitudes.
stories, legends and rhymes.

The writer feels that the appeal of birds is

a >

oo

difficult to express or explain.

heightened by detailed study.
understandable in a psychological context.
enhanced by media presentation.

17


=== Page 18 ===

Test 1

PAPER 2 WRITING (2 hours)

Part 1

You must answer this question. Write your answer in 300-350 words in an appropriate style.

1 A major international Sports competition is about to take place and your class has been talking
about the advantages of such events. During the discussion the foilowing points were made. Your
tutor has asked you to write an essay evaluating the advantages of major international sports
competitions and expressing your views on the comments made during the discussion.

It's the pursuit of
excellence in whatever
sport you compete in.

Just an opportunity
for the TV companies
to fill the screens

with boring sport ...

... where the largest
countries always win all
the medals and the rest
don’t stand a chance ...

Write your essay.

18


=== Page 19 ===

Paper 2 Writing

Part 2

Write an answer to one of the questions 2-5 in this part. Write your answer in 300-350 words in an
appropriate style.

2 Your local newspaper has invited readers to send in articles entitled
‘Humans and machines — who is in control?’

You decide to write an article describing the role that machines such as computers and robots
play in our lives, and saying whether you think there are any long-term dangers in our
dependence on machines.

Write your articte.

3 The music magazine High Notes has asked readers to write a review of a concert of their favourite
kind of music: for example, classical, jazz, rock or pop. You recently attended such an event. You
decide to write a review of the concert focusing on what made the music so memorable.

Write your review.

4 You work as a journalist for the travel section of a newspaper. You have recently visited a holiday
resort to find out more about it. Write a report of your visit which will be printed in the newspaper.
Within your report you should include information on the hotel you stayed in, local restaurants
and entertainment facilities. You should also describe the suitability of the resort as a family
holiday destination.

Write your report.

5 Based on your reading of one of these books, write on one of the following:

(a) Anne Tyler: The Accidental Tourist
Your local newspaper has invited readers to contribute an article to their literature column
entitled ‘Sad, but funny’. Write an article about The Accidental Tourist, mentioning what aspects
of the novel you find sad and how humour is reflected in the characters and their actions.
Write your article.

(b) Brian Moore: The Colour of Blood
You belong to a book club which has asked members to submit reports on books which
portray strong leaders. You decide to write a report on The Colour of Blood. You should focus
on the character of Cardinal Bem, and say how far you think he develops as a leader
throughout the book.

Write your report.
(c) LP. Hartley: The Go-Between
‘It did not occur to me that they had treated me badly. Write an essay for your tutor briefly

describing Leo's relationship with Marian Maudsley and Ted Burgess and saying how you
feel he was treated by these two adults.

Write your essay.

19


=== Page 20 ===

Test 1

PAPER 3 USE OF ENGLISH (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1

For questions 1-15, read the text below and think of the word which best fits each space. Use only
one word in each space. There is an example at the beginning (0).

Write your answers in CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet.

Bamps: 10) BILE] cllolMeEl I IOUOOUOOOACn

Getting Away From The Land

By the start of the twenty-first century, Britain had (0)...BECOME. .. a highly urbanised country, with
only a small proportion of the population in touch (1)...

v1. the working life of the countryside.
But this has by (2)............ means always been the case. At the end of the nineteenth century, in

excess (3)............ a million people were employed in agriculture, five (4)............ today’s figure.
Even (5)......+0000 , however, the total was significantly below that in most European countries, high
factory wages having already tempted people to leave the countryside in favour of the industrial
Cities. In (6).........056 to this, the English custom of primogeniture, DY (7)...eeseeeee Jand is inherited
only by the eldest son, served (8)........ »... further accelerate the rural exodus.

During the war years of the 1940s, at a time (9)... food was short, people seized whatever
opportunities (10).........008 were to improve their diet (11).........4. growing their own vegetables.
However, this practice soon lost (12)... appeal once the war was over, as (13)... eee other
temporary expediencies, such as keeping chickens in town gardens. (14).......... + iS more, mixed
arable and livestock farming, once the norm, became rare, So that even (15)..........08 people than

ever were involved in agriculture.

20


=== Page 21 ===

Paper 3 Use of English

Part 2

For questions 16-25, read the text below. Use the word given in capitals at the end of some of the
lines to form a word that fits in the space in the same line. There is an example at the beginning {0).

Write your answers in CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet.

Example: | 0

LLJ[E

[AIL

ele elcioir|L[e LIL

ae

Fast Brain Waves

Over half a century ago, scientists found they could record the

The question of why we have brain waves is, (19) , as hotly debated
today as it was when the patterns were discovered. But the meaning, and even

the existence, of fast rhythms in the alert brain is highly (20)............ .

What is problematic is that you can’t perceive these rhythms directly, they are so
well hidden in the noise created by other brain activity, but many (21)

now hold the (22)........... that the significance of these brain waves should not
be (23).......-... .
The latest suggestion is that the rhythms could be (24)........05 in detecting

Processes going on in different regions of the brain. Some believe that these
rhythms might even interact, and in doing so help the brain to package
information into (25)... thoughts. How we bring together these related

signals in the brain is a puzzle as yet unresolved.

ELECTRIC
RHYTHM

PERCEIVE
CONSCIOUS

ARGUE

CONTROVERSY

SEARCH
CONVINCE
ESTIMATE

DECIDE

COHERE

21


=== Page 22 ===

Test 1

Part 3

For questions 26-31, think of one word only which can be used appropriately in all three sentences.
Here is an example (0).

Example:

@ Some of the tourists are hoping to get compensation for the poor state of the hotel, and | think
they have a Very oo... cece case.

There’s no point in trying to wade across the river, the current is far too

If you're asking me which of the candidates should get the job, I'm afraid | don’t have any

Se re, views either way.
ae

Write only the missing word in CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet.

o![sitRoluilel IOC

26 = The police were given the .............0.ccee to break up gatherings of three or more people.

The study identified which fuels would have been used in electricity generation if nuclear
cee eee ete aeaaeeeseetetecee had not been used.

The Chairman of the company was reluctant to hand over ....ccccecccccscecccceeee. to the Board
of Directors in his absence.
27 Demand for beach toys is very 0.00... eceeceeeeee this year because of the bad summer

weather.

The villagers were angered when the council spokesperson put forward a rather
sees ditip sc yeseeeeceseseese argument for closing the local school.

This tea’s far t0O .......eeeeeeccec scene ; there’s too much water in the pot.

28 There’s no point in raising the matter again; | have no intention of changing my

Bettina has worked there for ten years and thinks she should have been offered a better
beens teeenaeeaeeeeeneenes in the company by now.

The airline’s financial ......0000..cceeeeeceee is healthier now than it has been for many years.

22


=== Page 23 ===

29

30

31

Paper 3 Use of English

| think what you said yesterday .............0cccle how difficult it is to get anyone to agree
on anything.
The lecturer oo... cceeeeeeeeeseeeees his talk with a really colourful selection of slides.

It was universally agreed that the book which won the photography prize was beautifully

The party will never succeed until it manages to ease the tensions between its conservative
and liberal .....0.......c cece ee .

The consortium agreed that the ..........0..ccc eee for the aircraft would be made in Canada.
The hotel consists of a large block with two smaller ..............cccceceeeee on each side.
Sally always joins me for 4 ........0.. cece eee of golf on Saturday mornings.

Our house is near the end of the postman’s
about 9.30.

pees eevee eee , So he doesn’t get here until

Management are meeting with the unions for another .............ccccccceeeeeee of negotiations to
avert the threatened strike.

23


=== Page 24 ===

Test 1

Part 4

For questions 32-39, complete the second sentence so that it has a similar meaning to the first
sentence, using the word given. Do not change the word given. You must use between three and
eight words, including the word given.

Here is an example (0).
Example:

0 Do you mind if | watch you while you paint?

objection

DO YOU oo. cnc eeteceeeceteeceseccasetestesissenaeensscctrseetneecees you while you paint?

Write only the missing words on the separate answer sheet.

32  Anne’s dedication to her work has always been exemplary.

herself

Fete e ene ee nent eee e tea ena eee sea eteteasaaecucuteusenseneceranes the most exemplary way.

33 The delay is a nuisance, but I'm sure Sam can solve our problems.

come

The delay is a nuisance, but I'm sure Sam can
to our problems.

34 Henrik was very pleased to be selected for the team.

delight

Fenn e eee et ee centre ets saeeeeeeeseesteatasdeneteesteasunecnenecuees for the team.

24


=== Page 25 ===

35

36

37

38

39

Paper 3 Use of English

Yoshi wanted to make sure that everything was as it should be on the big day.

leave

YOSHI GIAN't oe. ccc ecec cee ceeceeueecesene cesses cessuevessauaueettaedeeuansss on the big day.

The treasurer called a meeting to discuss the club’s finances.
purpose

The treasurer's
finances.

Bei: sess sessaeessessecReRPeeh acs... sO ole ecs sey eee to discuss the club’s

It may seem strange, but the composer has no formal training in music.
lacks

Strange

COCR) 000000000 eee EEE SERS 555 MBAR occ cco ee kind of formal training in
music.

I've never thought of asking the hotel staff for advice about restaurants.

occurred

EAS oo ec ecccecseseeeceesee seu ceueuueceeeeeesteeuseaeeuseusseaceanss the hotel staff for advice about
restaurants.

In spite of all my efforts, | couldn't persuade Soraya to come to the concert.

hard

No Maller oo. cece ccc ece cee ecceseneceeeseeeecansscaueeseusueecenenes , | couldn't persuade Soraya
ta come to the concert.

25


=== Page 26 ===

Test 1

Part 5

For questions 40-44, read the following texts on language. For questions 40-43, answer with a word

or short phrase. You do not need to write complete sentences. For

according to the instructions given.

Write your answers to questions 40-44 on the separate answer sheet.

40 Which phrase later in the text repeats the idea of ‘Curious theories abounded’? (line 6)

41

26

question 44, write a summary

So how did it all begin, this powerful, weird communication system of ours?
Frustratingly, we do not know. Our earliest written records are around 5,000 years
old, though most are more recent. Yet language must have evolved at least 50,000
years ago, and most experts propose a date 100,000 years ago. Until recently, how
it all began was an unfashionable question, a playground for cranks.

Curious theories abounded. Take the views of Lord Monboddo, a Scottish
aristocrat, who in 1773 published a book claiming that humans learned how to
spin and weave from spiders, how to construct dams from beavers, and how to sing
and speak from birds.

As absurd claims mushroomed, the question of language origin was avoided by
sertous scholars. Yet scholarly disapproval did not stop speculation. One
academic, in fact, has counted twenty-three ‘principal theories’ of language
origin. Another acidly commented: ‘The very fact ... that human animals are
ready to engage in a great “garrulity” over the merits and demerits of essentially

unprovable hypotheses, is an exciting testimony to the gap between humans and
other animals.’

The origin of language is like a juicy fruit dangling just out of reach. Human
8 guag' Juicy s ]
beings have a natural curiosity about it seemingly built into their minds: ‘Few
8 y Bly
questions in the study of human language have attracted so much attention,
ptovoked so much controversy, or resisted so resolutely their answers as that of
the origin of language,’ noted a recent writer.

What does ‘it’ in line 18 refer to?

line 6

line 18


=== Page 27 ===

42

43

44

Paper 3 Use of English

When we humans ever bother to think aoout what makes us different from all other
animals, we quickly focus on language. We use it to conjure up images in our mind,
whether for a solo drift in a daydream, or collectively, as we tell each other stories.
Quite simply, language is our medium. In spite of this, how it evolved remains amongst
the most speculative areas of investigation into human origins.

No wonder, then, that anthropologists’ speculations have long been as contentious as
they are imaginative. Unfortunately, of all human behaviour, the spoken word is
practically invisible in the archaeological record. It doesn’t manifest itself legibly in the
ways that technological skills show themselves in the complexity of toolkits, or as
cognitive and organisational skills imprint themselves on patterns of hunting practice.
But language surely influences how these skills aré used: in the standardisation of tool

types or in the cohesiveness of a tribal group searching for food. But how to know any
of these things: that’s the challenge.

In a recently published book, an American linguist has offered us a state-of-the-art
review of the work carried out on the origins of language. Among the patterns he sees
emerging is that modern spoken language, as a tool of highly efficient communication,
was the key to the success of anatomically modern humans who appeared around
150,000 years ago. It was, he argues, a simultaneous evolution of linguistic

competence and a capacity for complex thought that gave us an evolutionary edge
over other animals.

Explain the paradox in the relationship between language and humans described in paragraph

Explain in your own words what two factors in human evolution, mentioned in paragraph 3,
gave human beings an advantage over other animals.

In a paragraph of 50-70 words, summarise in your own words as far as possible why it has

been so difficult to investigate the origins of language, as described in both texts. Write your
summary on the separate answer sheet.

27


=== Page 28 ===

Test 1

PAPER 4 LISTENING (40 minutes approximately)

Part 1

You will hear four different extracts. For questions 1-8, choose the answer (A, B or C) which fits best
according to what you hear. There are two questions for each extract.

You hear a radio programme in which a man is talking about mountaineering.

1 The speaker feels the press coverage of mountaineering is

A untrue.
Beunfair.
C sunkind.

2 He suggests that people are attracted to climbing because of

A the level of regulation in the sport.
B_ the atmosphere amongst the participants.
C the contrast it provides with other activities.

You hear an educational psychologist talking at a public meeting about parents’ concerns for their
school-age children.

3 What is the psychologist doing when she speaks?

A describing her research with parents
B giving some reassurance to parents
C advising parents to improve their skills

4 According to the psychologist, what should parents do if their children ask for help with their
homework?

A listen and offer encouragement
B suggest alternative approaches
C supply answers to a difficult task

28


=== Page 29 ===

Paper 4 Listening

Yau hear part of a radio interview in which a social scientist, Ricardo Benetti, talks about self-deception.

5 The interviewer says that, in Benetti’s view, self-deception

A_ has been misunderstood as a concept.
Bis a strategy employed by developed cultures.
Cis a product of moral uncertainty.

6 Benetti gives the example of the watch to show that self-deception is
A essentially pointless.
Bs surprisingly complex.
C generally effective.

You hear a musician talking about classical music.

7 She refers to a documentary on the Renaissance period in order to

A emphasise her point about modern attitudes towards music.
B compare popular appreciation of music and painting.
C praise certain television programmes about music.

8 What is her attitude towards present-day musicians?

A She regrets their level of musicianship.
B_ She criticises their lack of imagination.
C She believes their needs are not being met.

29


=== Page 30 ===

Test 1

Part 2

You will hear part of a radio programme about penguins — birds which live in Antarctica.
For questions 9-17, complete the sentences with a word or short phrase,

Amanda Newark has been studying penguins as part of a project run by the

Scientists have found some evidence of what is known as

amongst penguins in Antarctica.

Amanda explains that the relationship between heart rate

and

In the experiment she describes, Amanda placed a

|

Amanda explains that, for this experiment, it wasn’t necessary to

is similar in penguins and humans.

containing a sensor ina penguin’s nest.

the penguins.

To identify the penguin she had approached, Amanda put

L

Amanda found that the penguin’s heart rate increased when groups of

on its front.

more than humans approached it.

Larger groups of people did not upset the penguin as long as

they remained when they were close to it.

Amanda feels that the arrangements made by

have been very good so far.

30


=== Page 31 ===

Paper 4 Listening

Part 3

You will hear the owner of a very unusual house, and his architect, talking to a visitor to the house.
For questions 18-22, choose the answer (A, B, C or D) which fits best according to what you hear.

18 The owner feels that contemporary architecture

A_ has been impressive in London.

Bis better than it used to be.

C has provided beautiful things to look at.
D_ produces work of lasting value.

19 For the owner, one problem of living in the house is

the position of the kitchen.
the state of the walls.

the number of storeys.
the size of the rooms.

90M}

20 The architect thinks the original builders were economical because they

used readily available materials.
dug extensive foundations.

C_ chose a soft piece of ground.

D built on a flat piece of land.

D>

21 The present kitchen was originally used for

A_ keeping provisions.

B storing arms and weapons.
C dining and entertaining.

D holding prisoners.

22 The architect feels he has

A improved on the original design.

B preserved the original function.
Cleft a puzzle for future generations.
D_ given the house a viable future.

31


=== Page 32 ===

Test 1

Part 4

You will hear part of a radio discussion between two people, Louisa and William, who have been to
@ new modern art museum. For questions 23-28, decide whether the opinions are expressed by
only one of the speakers, or whether the speakers agree.

Write L for Louisa,
W_ for William,
or B for Both, where they agree.

23 It is not easy to find your way round the museum.

24 The title of the main exhibition reflects current ideas in art.

25 True art need not provoke an extreme reaction.

26 The sculpture at the entrance is of doubtful artistic value.

27 The exhibition is too showy.

28 Art should sometimes be soothing.

32


=== Page 33 ===

Paper 5 Speaking

PAPER 5 SPEAKING (19 minutes)

There are two examiners. One (the interlocutor) conducts the test, providing you with the necessary
materials and explaining what you have to do. The other examiner (the assessor) will be introduced
to you, but then takes no further part in the interaction.

Part 1 (3 minutes)

The interlocutor first asks you and your partner a few questions which focus on information about
yourselves and personal opinions.

Part 2 (4 minutes)

In this part of the test you and your partner are asked to talk together. The interlocutor places a
set of pictures on the table in front of you. There may be only one picture in the set or as many as
seven pictures. This stimulus provides the basis for a discussion. The interlocutor first asks an
introductory question which focuses on two of the pictures (or in the case of a single picture, on
aspects of the picture). After about a minute, the interlocutor gives you both a decision-making task
based on the same set of pictures.

The picture for Part 2 is on page C3 of the colour section.

Part 3 (12 minutes)

You are each given the opportunity to talk for two minutes, to comment after your partner has
spoken and to take part in a more general discussion.

The interlocutor gives you a card with a question written on it and asks you to talk about it for
two minutes. After you have spoken, your partner is first asked to comment and then the
interlocutor asks you both another question related to the topic on the card. This procedure is
repeated, so that your partner receives a card and speaks for two minutes, you are given an
opportunity to comment and a follow-up question is asked.

Finally, the interlocutor asks some further questions, which leads to a discussion on a general
theme related to the subjects already covered in Part 3.

The cards for Part 3 are on pages C2 and C10 of the colour section.

33


=== Page 34 ===

Test 2
PAPER 1 READING (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1

For questions 1-18, read the three texts below and decide which answer (A, B, C or D) best fits
each gap.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

Citizen Kane

When the film Citizen Kane finally appeared in 1941, despite the brouhaha that attended its (1) ....
— delayed because of distributors’ fears of the harm William Randolph Hearst, its (2) .... subject,
might do to them ~ and largely ecstatic reviews, it was not a commercial success. It was television
that brought it back to the public consciousness. It is perhaps the one film, above all others, that has
inspired people to become film-makers. This is all the more astonishing since it was Orson Welles’s
first film. Welles always (3) .... that its success arose from his having no idea of what he was or
wasn't allowed to do: he just went ahead and did it. But he had an extraordinary team at his (4) ....,
cameraman Gregg Toland, screenwriter Herman J. Mankiewicz, and the special-effects wizard
Linwood Dunn. When Welles and Mankiewicz {5) ....0n the idea of portraying a newspaper magnate
who both was and wasn’t Hearst, Welles realised that he had found a perfect vehicle for himself both
as director and actor, and (6) .... his chance with the energy of a whirlwind.

1 A issue B release C publication D broadcast
2 A attested B admitted C alleged D affirmed
3 A maintained B upheid C detailed D specified
4 A disposal B invitation C hand D option

5 A latched B jumped ¢ caught D hit

6 A gripped B plucked C seized D wrenched

Dermot and Carmel

Dermot thought that Carmel was rather odd that morning. Twice he had said that he might be late
and not to worry if he (7) .... into the golf club on the way home. He had to have a natter with someone
and that was the best place to have it. Twice she had (8) .... her head amiably and distantly as if she
hadn't really heard or understood.

34


=== Page 35 ===

‘Will you be all right? What are you going to do today?’ he had asked.

She had smiled. ‘Funny you should ask that. | was just thinking that | hadn’t anything to do all day
S0 | was going to (9) .... down town and look at the shops. | was thinking that it was almost a sinful
thing, just (10) .... away the day’

Dermot had smiled back. ‘You're (11) .... to enjoy yourself. And as | said, if I’m late | won't want
anything to eat. So don’t (12) .... to any trouble.’

‘No, that’s fine, she said.

7 A fell B bumped C dropped D cut

8 A nodded B gestured C shrugged D stirred
9 A pace B tread C step D stroll
10 A drifting B killing C easing D idling
11 A sanctioned B entitled C justified D rightful
12 A take B get C go D put
Title Race

Tea boy? Do you mind, I'm a mobile lukewarm beverage resource facilitator.

Human nature provides the most divine of comedies. (13) .... a recent study which has informed the
nation that job titles are a prime cause of envy and unrest at work. A survey by a leading firm of
recruitment consultants found that 90% of employers and 70% of employees admit that titles create
(14) .... among colleagues.

Most shockingly, the survey found that 70% of office workers would be willing to (15) .... a pay rise
in favour of a more ‘motivational’ or ‘professional job title. If our vanity is (16) .... such proportions
that even basic greed is being overwhelmed, we are indeed in dire straits.

The truth is that in these brave new days of the early twenty-first century, nobody is content to be
(17) .... subordinate. The titles under discussion (18) .... the emphasis on ability (specialist,
coordinator) but are, in fact, little more than euphemisms.

13 A Corroborate B Testify C Confirm D Witness
14 A compartments B demarcations C divisions D partitions
15 A forgo B revoke C forbear D resign
16 A attaining B reaching C touching D finding
17 A defined B marked C labelled D identified

18 A place B set C fix D allocate


=== Page 36 ===

Test 2

You are going to read four extracts which are all concerned in some w
For questions 19-26, choose the answer (A, B, C or D)

Part 2

ay with modern technology.
which you think fits best according to the

text.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

19

20

Writing by hand and on screen

Dr Johnson maintained that ‘what is written without effort is in gencral read without
pleasure’. The converse is that good writing comes hard. Looking back through my
handwritten school essays I was surprised at how few crossings-out they contained. Today
I would have rewritten them five times over. I am sure the reason was that they were
physically hard to write. The slowness of the hand disciplined the brain. What would be
difficult to alter or crase was written with care. The casual facility of the computer leads
to sloppiness. Most writers using word processors find the time spent correcting early
drafis more or less equates with the time originally spent on handwritten text.

Equally, the e-mail, unlike the handwritten letter, is emotionally ponderous. This
electronic Eros is said to have revived the art of the Jove letter. Millions of these missives
now flow down the lines, where previously there was only idle chatter, Hurrah for that,
At least these e-mails are written, in a sort of English and a sort of grammar. But words
printed on a screen pack a monotonous punch. ‘Their writers are often unaccustomed
to the power of the written word and tend, in computer jargon, to ‘flare’. Their meaning
becomes exaggerated and distorted in transmission, And printed words written in haste
lack the care and character of handwriting.

What point does the writer feel is illustrated by his school essays?

It is a mistake to change what you have written too many times.

The standard of what you write is better if it cannot easily be changed.

Word processors give writers a false impression of the quality of what they have written.
Computers make writers change their view concerning what constitutes good writing.

oo 8 >

Which of the following does the writer imply about e-mails?

It is unlikely that they will remain a common way of sending love letters.
They are sometimes entertaining rather than informative.

They bear some relation to handwritten letters.

It is common for people to include computer terminology in them.

ono Ww YP


=== Page 37 ===

21

22

Paper1 Reading

The CD

I put down my cup and went to inspect the CD. The case was disappointing
but the rainbow-silver disc inside looked interesting.

“Wonderful little things, aren’t they?’ Mr Warriston said, coming back into the
room. I agreed, gingerly handing the disc to him. ‘Amazing they manage to
squeeze seventy minutes of music onto them,’ he continued, bending to the hi-
fi device. He switched it on and all sorts of lights came on. He pressed a button
and a little drawer slid out of the machine. He put the disc inside, pressed the
button again and the tray glided back in again. ‘Of course, some people say
they sound sterile, but I think they...’

‘Do you have to turn them over, like records?’ I asked.

‘What? No,’ Mr Warriston said, straightening. ‘No, you only play one side.’
‘Why?’ I asked him.

He looked nonplussed, and then thoughtful. ‘You know,’ he said, ‘I’ve no idea.
I don’t see why you couldn’t make both sides playable and double the
capacity...’ He stared down at the machine. ‘You could have two lasers, or just
turn it over by hand... hmm.’ He smiled at me. ‘Yes, good point.’ He nodded
over at my wooden chair. ‘Anyway. Come on, let’s get you sitting in the best
place for the stereo effect, ch?’

I smiled, pleased to have thought of a technical question Mr Warriston could
not answer.

What do we learn about the narrator from the extract?

He was keen to prove that Mr Warriston could be wrong about some things.
He was not very good at understanding technical matters.

He already had a low opinion of CDs.

He had never operated a CD player himself.

900aU0P,Y

What do we learn about Mr Warriston from the extract?

He liked to be knowledgeable about how machines worked.

He found the narrator's questions annoying.

He was more impressed by the way CDs worked than the sound they made.
He was pretending to know a great deal about CDs.

vu0OWP


=== Page 38 ===

Test 2

23

24

38

Books versus Electronic Text

In comparing books and electronic text,
the author Malcolm Bradbury was spot
on when he said that if matches had been
invented after cigarette lighters, we'd
have marvelled at the improvement. Most
of the propaganda, dazzled by newness,
states that electronic text is a change
comparable to the invention of printing
and that it is already nearly completed.
It ignores the fact that shifts in
consciousness take generations and such
rhetoric falls the trap of
chronocentricity, the egotism that one’s
own generation sits on the very cusp of
history. Take this treasure from Mighry
Micro, a book from 1979: ‘The 1980s
will see the book as we know it, and as
our ancestors created and cherished it,
begin a slow and steady slide to oblivion’

into

So far, so wrong. Reading anything
lengthy on a screen is such a miserable
experience that most never do it and, in
any case, the organisation of what resides
in computers encourages people to dip
into text. Techno-proselytisers have
extracted virtue here by claiming that
inherent flightiness leads to new forms
of narrative and imaginative space.
But there’s nothing new about ‘non-
linearity’. Lots of books have never been
read from beginning to end — most
religious texts, dictionaries and poetry
collections spring to mind. What is new
is not so much the branchings of
electronic text as that computers don’t
invite the joined-up thinking of reading
anything in its entirety.

The writer uses the quote from Mighty Micro to illustrate

o0QM>

the speed at which propaganda can have an effect.

people's tendency to overlook the disadvantages of change.

people’s desire to feel that they are living in a period of great change.
the view on new inventions expressed by Malcolm Bradbury.

The writer implies that electronic text will not completely replace books because

oY

=e)

itis not suited to people's desire to read some things all the way through.

it will lead to a style of writing that many people will find unappealing.

only certain kinds of books will be presented in the form of electronic text.
dipping into text can require more effort than reading something right through.


=== Page 39 ===

Paper1 Reading

The Office

Charles walked through the office door and into a perfect world of order. The
carpet was clear of the paper avalanche which had buried it on the very day it was
put down, and the naked desk was dark wood, just as he remembered it from the
Sotheby’s auction of five weeks ago. Neat file-holders were being put in their proper
drawers. Twelve years of trade journals now filled the shelves on one wall.

Kathleen strained to close the door of the filing cabinet and then turned on him.
‘You have to go to computers, Charles. This is just too much.’

‘Hello, Kathleen. Oh, this is amazing” He was admiring the room, its antique
furniture. He was not visualising a computer or any other mechanical device in it,

not even a pencil sharpener. ‘Simply amazing,’ he said, altogether skirting the issue
of computers,

Over the two years he had known her, they’d had this conversation many times.
She could never understand his resistance to the technology when he was so adept
at computers and had even published an important paper on computer-mode
giftedness. She had been the inspiration for that paper. Via the keyboard, she could
dip her fingers into the stuffing of any software and make it into a new animal that
could sit up and bark at the moon if she wished.

25 What particularly pleased Charles when he first entered the office?

Kathleen was working hard to tidy it up.

The furniture had been rearranged.

There were no longer any mechanical devices there.
Its decor was now clearly visible.

CO UY

26 What do we learn about Kathleen from this extract?

A She did things on computer that Charles did not approve of.

B She could do things with computers that Charles considered exceptional.
C She had computer skills that even Charles could not understand.

D She had become resigned to Charles's attitude to computers.

39


=== Page 40 ===

Test 2

Part 3

You are going to read an extract from a book. Seven paragraphs have been removed from the
extract. Choose from the paragraphs A-H the one which fits each gap (27-33). There is one extra

paragraph which you do not need to use.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

The Vienna Assignment

| was in Vienna to take photographs. That was
generally the reason | was anywhere — then.
Photographs were more than my livelihood. They were
part of my life. The way light fell on a surface never
failed to tug at my imagination. The way one picture, a
single snapshot, could capture the essence of a time
and place, a city, a human being, was embedded in
my consciousness.

- an

| 27

'd come close once, when some weird aptness in the
knotted shape of a smoke plume from a burning oil
well made my picture the one newspapers and
magazines ail over the world suddenly wanted. Brief
glory trom an even briefer moment. Just luck, really.
But they say you make your own — the bad as well as
the good.

E |
But, still, | was taking photographs. And | was being
paid to do it. It didn’t sound bad to me. The assignment
was actually a piece of happenstance. |’d done the
London shots for a glossy coffee-table picture book:
Four Cities in Four Seasons ~ London, Paris, Rome,
Vienna, a European co-publishing venture that netted
me a juicy commission to hang round moody locations
in my home city in spring, summer, autumn, and
winter. I'd given my own particular slant to daffodils in
Hyde Park and heat haze and traffic fumes in
Piccadilly.

[=]

It was just after an obliging cold snap over Christmas
and New Year that | handed in my London-in-winter
batch and got the message that the Austrian

40

photographer, Rudi Schissner, had walked out on the
job in Vienna for reasons nobady seemed to think |
needed to know about. Rather than call in someone
new, they offered me the substitute’s role.

They put me up at the Europa, on Neuer Markt, in the
heart of the old city. I'd last been to Vienna for along
weekend with my wife: a midsummer tourist scramble
round just about every palace and museum in the joint.
It had been hot, hectic and none too memorable. |
hadn't even taken many photographs. On my own, ina
cold hard January, it was going to be different, though.

ia[ sts

The first day | didn’t even try. | rode the trams round
the Ringstrasse, getting on and off as | pleased to
sample the moods of the place. The weather was set,
frozen like the vast baroque remnants of the
redundant empire that had laid the city out. | hadn’t
seen what Schissner had done with spring, summer
or autumn. | hadn't wanted to.

"
Next morning, | was out at dawn. Snow flurries
overnight meant Stephansplatz would be virginally
white as well as virtually deserted. | hadn't figured out
how to cope with the cathedral in one shot. Its spire
Stretched like a giraffe’s neck into the silver-grey sky,
but at ground level it was elephantine, squatting
massively in the centre of the city. Probably there was
no way to do it. I'd have to settle for something partial.
In that weather, at that time, it could still be magical.
But then, there's always been something magical
about photography.


=== Page 41 ===

And even when you know why it happens you don't

lose the sense of its mystery. That stays with you for

Paper1 Reading

ever. Perhaps that’s why what happened at
Stephansplatz that morning failed in some strange
way to surprise me.

The Austrian publishers had liked what they'd
seen of my stuff, apparently. Besides, | was free,
whereas the French and Italian photographers
weren't. And | was glad to go. Things at home
weren't great. They were a long way short of that.
A week snapping snowy Vienna didn’t have to be
dressed up as a compliment to my artistry for me
to go like a shot.

This was going to be my Vienna, not his. And it
was going to give itself to me. | just had to let it
come. A photograph is a moment. But you have to
wait for the moment to arrive. So 1 bided my time
and looked and looked until | could see clearly.
And then | was ready.

I'd always shied clear of accessories, arguing that
all you needed to do the job were a good pair of
eyes and a decent camera. Plus spontaneity of
course, which you don’t get fiddling with tripod
legs. | just prowled round the square, looking for
the right angle, for some way to give scale as well
as atmosphere to the scene.

It certainly seemed that way to the nineteenth-
century pioneers, before the chemistry of it was
properly understood. Pictures develop and
strengthen and hold by an agency of their own.
You can stand in a darkened room and watch a
blank sheet of paper become a photograph.

E | went freelance after that, which should have
been a clever move and would probably have
worked out that way, but for life beyond the lens
taking a few wrong tumings. The mid-nineties
weren't quite the string of triumphs I’d foreseen
when my defining image made it to the cover of
Time magazine. That's why | was in Vienna, rather
than anywhere even faintly newsworthy.

F Idalso reconciled myself to the best and truest of
what I'd delivered being tossed aside. It was, after
all, only a picture book. It wasn’t meant to
challenge anyone's preconceptions or make them
see instead of look.

G One day, one second, | might close the shutter on
the perfect photograph. There was always the
chance, so long as there was film in my camera.
Finish one; load another; and keep looking, with
eyes wide open. That was my code. Had been for
a long time.

H_ | knew that the moment | climbed off the shuttle
bus from the airport and let my eyes and brain
absorb the pinky-grey dome of light over the
snow-sugared roofs of the city. | was going to
enjoy myself here. | was going to take some great
pictures.

41


=== Page 42 ===

Test 2

Part 4

You are going to read an extract from a novel. For questions 34-40, choose the answer {A, B, ©
or D) which you think fits best according to the text.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

Simon Costello knew that the purchase of the house in
Pembroke Square had been a mistake within a year of his
and Lois’s moving in. A possession which can only be
afforded by the exercise of stringent and calculated
economy is best not afforded at all. But at the time it had
seemed a sensible, as well as a desirable, move. He had
had a run of successful cases and they were coming in with
reassuring regularity. Lois had returned to her job at the
advertising agency within two months of the birth of the
twins, and had been given a rise which took her salary to
thirty-five thousand. It was Lois who had argued the more
strongly for a move, but he had put up little resistance to
arguments which at the time had seemed compelling: the
flat wasn't really suitable for a family; they needed more
room, a garden, separate accommodation for an au pair. All
these, of course, could have been achieved in a suburb or
in a less fashionable part of London than Pembroke Square,
but Lois was ambitious for more than additional space.
Mornington Mansions had never been an acceptable
address for an up-and-coming young barrister and a
successful businesswoman. She never said it without a
sense that even speaking the words subtly diminished her
standing, socially and economically.

Lois had decided that a necessary economy was for one of
them to travel by public transport. Her firm was on the other
side of London; obviously Simon must be the one to
economise. The overcrowded tube journey, started in a
mood of envious resentment, had become an unproductive
thirty minutes of brooding on present discontents. He would
recall his grandfather's house in Hampstead where he had
stayed as a boy, the smell of dinner from the kitchen, his
grandmother's insistence that the returning breadwinner,
tired from his exhausting day in court, should be given
peace, a little gentle cosseting, and relief from every petty
domestic anxiety. She had been a ‘lawyer's wife’,
indefatigable in legal good causes, elegantly present at all
lawyers’ functions, apparently content with the sphere of life
which she had made her own. Well, that world had passed
for ever. Lois had made it plain before their marriage that her
career was as important as his. It hardly needed saying; this
was, after all, a modern marriage. The job was important to
her and important to them both. The house, the au pair, their
whole standard of living depended on two salaries. And now
what they were precariously achieving could be destroyed
by that self-righteous, interfering Venetia.

42

Venetia must have come straight from the court to their
offices and she had been in a dangerous mood. Something
or someone had upset her. But the word ‘upset’ was too
weak, too bland for the intensity of furious disgust with
which she had confronted him. Someone had driven her to
the limit of her endurance. He cursed himself. If he hadn't
been in his room, if he’d only left a minute earlier, the
encounter wouldn't have taken place, she would have had
the night to think it over, to consider what, if anything, she
ought to do. Probably nothing. The morning might have
brought sense. He remembered every word of her angry
accusations.

‘| defended Brian Cartwright today. Successfully. He told
me that when you were his counsel four years ago you
knew before trial that he had bribed three of the jury. You
did nothing. You went on with the case. Is that true?’

‘He’s lying. It isn’t true.’

‘He also said that he passed over some shares in his
company to your fiancée. Also before trial, Is that true?’

‘I tell you, he’s lying. None of it’s true.’

The denial had been as instinctive as an arm raised to
ward off a blow and had sounded unconvincing even to his
own ears. His whole action had been one of guilt. The first
cold horror draining his face was succeeded by a hot
flush, bringing back shameful memories of his
headmaster’s study, of the terror of the inevitable
punishment. He had made himself look into her eyes and
had seen the look of contemptuous disbelief. If only he’d
had some warning. He knew now what he should have
said: ‘Cartwright told me after the trial but | didn’t believe
him. | don’t believe him now. That man will say anything to
make himself important.’

But he had told a more direct, more dangerous lie, and she
had known that it was a lie. Even so, why the anger, why the
disgust? What was that old misdemeanour to do with her?
Who had sent Venetia Aldridge to be guardian of the
conscience of their legal practice? Or of his, come to that?
Was her own conscience so clear, her behaviour in court
always immaculate? Was she justified in destroying his
career? And it would be destruction. He wasn't sure what
exactly she could do, how far she was prepared to go, but
if this got about, even as a rumour, he was done for.


=== Page 43 ===

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

Paper i Reading

One reason why Simon Costello had agreed to buy the house in Pembroke Square was that

A Lois persuaded him that he had a tendency to be too cautious.

B the idea arose at a time when he was optimistic about his earning capacity.
C he had not dared to dispute the reasons Lois had given him for doing so.

D he had felt that neither he nor Lois would have difficulty economising later.

One reason why Lois had wanted to buy the house was that

A. she felt that Mornington Mansions reflected poorly on her status.

B_ Mornington Mansions was a place that other people had not heard of.
C_ she had never been happy living in Mornington Mansions.

D Mornington Mansions was in a particularly unpopular part of London.

Simon recalled that the atmosphere in his grandparents’ house had been marked by

his grandfather's dislike of everyday household matters.

a clear understanding that his grandmother was the dominant figure there.
apprehension as to what mood his grandfather would be in.

his grandmother's understanding attitude towards his grandfather.

GvOUP,

When Simon compared his own marriage with that of his grandparents, he

A was resentful that Lois did not have the same attitude as his grandmother.

B_ realised that his grandmother had been less content than she had seemed.

C wondered why he and Lois had not discussed her career plans more thoroughly.
D_ resigned himself to the fact that his own situation was inevitable.

Simon ‘cursed himself’ (line 51) when he thought about his confrontation with Venetia
because

A he had failed to anticipate how angry she would be on her return from court.
B he had not given her time to reflect on the situation in a more measured way.
C he felt that it had been the result of nothing other than his own bad luck.

D he realised that he had not appreciated how much pressure she was under.

During the conversation about Brian Cartwright, Simon had

A_ looked like someone who was being dishonest.

B_ thought of responses but felt unable to give them.

C been puzzled as to why his responses had seemed dishonest.
D_ felt the need to control his own temper.

Which of the following did Simon wonder about Venetia?

why she had such a good reputation
whether she had something to hide

why she liked spreading rumours
whether she was acting out of character

00 WU >

43


=== Page 44 ===

Test 2

PAPER2 WRITING (2 hours)

Part 1

You must answer this question. Write your answer in 300-350 words in an appropriate style.

1 An area in the centre of your town is to be redeveloped. The Town Council has published the
following suggestions and asked for proposals from residents. You decide to write a proposal
addressed to the Town Council in which you discuss the advantages of each suggestion and
justify your choice of one of the options.

| Town Redevelopment

* a leisure centre, which will not only update
the existing sports facilities, but also include
new cinemas and restaurants

* a hotel and conference centre designed to
attract visitors and increase opportunities for
employment locally

* a supermarket with a multi-storey car park
and some new homes for local people

Write your proposal.

44


=== Page 45 ===

Paper 2 Writing

Part 2

Write an answer to one of the questions 2-5 in this part. Write your answer in 300-350 words in an
appropriate style.

2 Amagazine is running a series entitled Musical Memories. Readers are invited to send in articles
explaining why a piece of music reminds them of a particular occasion, and saying why the
occasion is important to them.

Write your article.

3 Anew magazine has been published to promote tourism in your country. Readers have been invited
to send in reviews of an annual public event in their area, such as a festival. You decide to send ina
review briefly describing your chosen event, and explaining its significance for local life and culture.

Write your review.

4 The following headline appeared in Feelgood, a tifestyle magazine, introducing an article about
the attitudes of young people.

Being young - it’s not fun

You decide to write a letter to the magazine based on your own experience, and giving reasons
for your views.

Write your letter.

5 Based on your reading of one of these books, write on one of the following:

(a) Anne Tyler: The Accidental Tourist
Your local English-language newspaper has invited readers to send in reviews of books
featuring characters who set about changing their lives. You decide to write a review of
The Accidental Tourist, focusing on how Macon’s character develops as a result of his
misfortunes, finally allowing him to break free from his past.

Write your review.

(b) Brian Moore: The Colour of Blood

‘Joy filled him. At last, he knew peace. Write an essay for your tutor briefly describing the
events that take place in the church at Rywald. You should analyse the reasons for Cardinal
Bem’s feelings at the end of the book.

Write your essay.

(c) L.P. Hartley: The Go-Between

Your local English-language newspaper is planning a series of articles on the role of the
weather in fiction. You have read The Go-Between and decide to submit an article which

assesses the importance of the weather to the story. You should consider how it affects the
course of events at Brandham Hall.

Write your article.

45


=== Page 46 ===

Test 2

PAPER 3 USE OF ENGLISH (1 hour 30 minutes}

Part 1

For questions 1-15, read the text below and think of the word which best fits each space. Use only
one word in each space. There is an example at the beginning (0).

Write your answers in CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet.

pame: [Olle Viel OOOO ooo

Advertising

Each and (0)..5YERY. day we see hundreds of advertising images. (1)... other kind of image
confronts US (2).......0006 anything like the same frequency. Never in history (3)............ there been
such a concentration of visual messages. The brain cannot help (4)....cesee take these messages
in, and for a moment they stimulate the imagination ) ee virtue of their appeal to memory or
expectation.

Advertising is usually justified as a competitive medium of benefit (6)............ the public and
efficient manufacturers. (7)........0.. it may be true that, in advertising, one particular brand
competes against another, it is also just (8)........... true that such publicity images confirm and
enhance others. That there are choices to be made (Q)..seeceeeees without saying but, ultimately,
advertising as a system makes a single proposal ~ namely (10)............ we transform ourselves,
or our lives, by buying something more. We are led to believe that, by (11)........... doing, we will
IN (12)..ceseeeeees way or another become richer — but in fact we will become poorer, (13)
spent our money.

Advertising shows us peopie who have apparently been transformed into a new state and are,asa
result, enviable. The state of being envied is (14)... constitutes glamour. And advertising is
in the business (15)............ manufacturing glamour.

46


=== Page 47 ===

Paper 3 Use of English

Part 2

For questions 16-25, read the text below. Use the word given in capitals at the end of some of the
lines to form a word that fits in the space in the same line. There is an example at the beginning (0).

Write your answers in CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet.

Example: (0]) i INI TIE (LIL VEN CT UPAlL]L |_|

Science — is it only for the specialist?

There was a time when, as an educated person, you would have been expected
latest novel, been familiar with the work of poets, and been wholly (16).........05
with the current state of art and music. You would have felt equally relaxed
discussing philosophical ideas in some (17).........06 , should the subject of the
discussion have changed. This would have meant the (18)
related to the results of scientific research.

Bees uses of issues

However, as significant discoveries accumulated, it became (19)............
difficult for any one person to keep abreast of developments across the entire
field. A point was reached where the pace of progress was so great that a single
brain became completely (20)............ to absorb the wealth of information.
Scientists could no longer (21)............ switch back and forth between

disciplines as before. They became specialists.

A broadly-educated person today can still have a general (22)...........- of most
of the specialisms, but not in the (23)............ detail in which research workers
are themselves immersed. Trapped inside their own special areas, the pitfall for
most research scientists is an (24)............ to communicate with those working
on areas bordering their own, let alone totally (25).........00 areas.

INTELLECT
CONVERSE

DEEP
INCLUDE

INCREASE

POWER
CONFIDENCE

AWARE
INTRICACY

ABLE
CONNECT

47


=== Page 48 ===

Test 2

For questions 26-31 . think of one word only which can be used appropriately in all three sentences.
Here is an example (0).

Example:

0 Some of the tourists are hoping to get compensation for the Poor state of the hotel, and | think
they have a VOTY case.
There’s no point in trying to wade across the river, the current is far too

If you're asking me which of the candidates should get the job, 'm afraid | don’t have any
Nee e ea taa eee eeca cease views either Way.

“(sR ONMECOOONOO OOO

Write only the missing word in CAPITAL LETTERS on the Separate answer sheet.

26 Pia’s under a lot of Stress because she’s in the oo... of applying for a new job.

The company was trying to develop a new Manufacturing oo. in an attempt
to cut costs.

Many people buy cosmetics in an attempt to slow down the o.oo. of ageing.

27 ~The managing director would like 10 the candidates as a group before
beginning the individual interviews.

I'm not sure what to do — it’s not the sort of problem we expect to... eee. now we
have all this modern technology.

The union officials said the management had agreed to... the majority of

their demands.

28 The party leaders got together to plan their next 0... in the election campaign.

Its high time we made a... eco. : there’s so much to do.

48


=== Page 49 ===

29

30

31

Paper 3 Use of English

The censors cut one particular .............0..eeceeeee ee from the film before it was released.

I'd rather go to the cinema; I’m afraid opera isn’t my «0.0.0... eee .

We couldn't get to sleep because we could hear the neighbours making a

After lunch, we had @ ...........cccceeeeeeee eens of cards, just to pass the time.

His grandparents had @ ..............ceeceeeseeeee in Luca’s upbringing, as his parents worked full-
time.

Mrs Spencer opened the door and said, ‘If you lay ao... eee eres on my son, there'll
be trouble.’

The city is keen to shake offits 00.0.0... eee as a post-industrial problem area.

It was only with the spread of cinemas in the 1920s that people began to regard the moving
fee eepeeeeeeaeeseeeseceeees as a real art form.

Throughout the trial, Hopkins was the very ...............:..0..:0 of respectability.

49


=== Page 50 ===

Test 2

Here is an example (0).

Example:
© Do you mind if | watch you while you paint?
objection

DO YOU ve resssetstesesssestetttsanseettetessssetinieiseseeeeec you while you paint?

Write only the missing words on the Separate answer sheet.

32 The police had to let the suspect go because new evidence was produced.
light

The police had to {et the suspect go
evidence produced,

33 The cost of building materials has gone up a great deal recently.

sharp

rere aS BORN sess ccccststseteensntneseintatintiiciteee building materials
recently.

34 Maria didn’t teil John the news until he had finished his meal.

for

eee ears cette teen tie tae teaterteatcrseees, telling him the news.

50


=== Page 51 ===

35

36

37

38

39

Paper 3 Use of English

Don’t let her relaxed manner deceive you; she’s an extremely shrewd businesswoman!

taken

Don't let oo... ccc eccccccceeeesceeseesuneeeeeeaueveseeesuueverssuevenevesces her relaxed manner; she’s an
extremely shrewd businesswoman!

Unless the weather changes dramatically overnight, we'll be leaving at dawn.

ho

PrOVIGING ........c.cceceesec cee ceecceeeee teste esaeeaeeeeeeseeeeseceeeceeneeres the weather overnight, we'll
be leaving at dawn.

Werner found it hard to get used to the fact that he’d lost his job.

terms

Werner found it hard ............cceccccecccsceececceeceuseeccesceecteseessuenesceseeenesere. the fact that he'd
lost his job.

Simon does not intend to visit his aunt again.

has

Benen enna eee eee nee tte cee ne ane EE tes esata ee et pba rtn as his aunt again.

They gave Despina the impression that she would win first prize.

believe

DOSPINA o.oo ice eeeeeeeesee eee seceeeeeeceeceusessesttettnrtnenaneenes she would win first prize.

51


=== Page 52 ===

Test 2

Part 5

For questions 40-44, read the following texts on journalism. For questions 40-43, answer with a
word or short phrase. You do not need to write complete sentences. For question 44, write a
summary according to the instructions given.

Write your answers to questions 40-44 on the separate answer sheet.

40

41

52

The news business relies heavily on high technology, but there is nothing scientific
about it. ‘Feel’ is the oldest tool in journalism. Journalists are guided by hunch, gut
instinct and assumptions dating back to the dawn of civilisation. This is admirably
demonstrated in Evelyn Waugh’s novel Scoop, written in 1936, in which two
journalists are sent off to report on a war in a far distant country, foreign
correspondents called away from journalistic jobs, which each knows are more
important. At home, one covered politics and scandal, and the other wrote about
the countryside. This order of priorities hasn't changed much, | fear.

News is about the exceptional, something which threatens, benefits, outrages,
enlightens, titillates or amuses. Preferably it carries a headline: ‘Pop star becomes
astronaut!’ or ‘Killer bees invade small town!’. But it might also be a slow pattern
of details, like a deadly virus gradually spreading into a worldwide epidemic.

There is no shortage of news reports. An average newspaper editor might sift
through a million words of news daily, but have room for only a few thousand.
Decisions are not made about what is fit to print. They are about what fits. And
where space is tight, news from far away is always the loser.

line 8

According to the writer, what is paradoxical in the first paragraph about the process of news

production?

Which phrase later in the text echoes the idea behind ‘This order of priorities hasn’t changed

much’? (line 8)


=== Page 53 ===

Paper 3 Use of English

Newspaper reporters must often work on their own, but some prefer the security
of comparing notes with those from other organisations. The result can be the lies
and trash of which the tabloids are often accused, but in the quality press this is,
in my opinion, rare and exceptional.

Why? Because the reporting of news is not a series of ‘almost random reactions to
random events’, to use a much misused quote. It is a highly organised, systematic
response based on years of personal experience among senior journalists. This is,
of course, an artificial human invention, because there are no God-given, ultimate,
objective means of measuring news priorities. But it is one to which most
journalists and most broadcasters bring a strong sense of public responsibility.

Journalists may often be unaware of the way their own social status or personal
beliefs can affect their judgements or their phrasing. Consciously or
unconsciously, however, they generally base their choice and treatment of news
on two criteria: firstly, what is the political, social, economic and human
significance of the event, and secondly, will it interest, excite and entertain the
readers? The first takes precedence over the second, but both matter. No

newspaper can succeed unless it strikes a chord with its readers and keeps in tune
with them.

42 Which two phrases in the text reflect a very negative view of newspaper articles and their
contents?

43 In your own words, explain how an individual reporter's social status or personal beliefs can
affect his or her reporting.

44 |na paragraph of 50-70 words, summarise in your own words as far as possible the basis
on which news stories are selected for publication, as described in both texts. Write your
summary on the separate answer sheet.

53


=== Page 54 ===

Test 2

PAPER 4 LISTENING (40 minutes approximately)

Part 1

You will hear four different extracts. For questions 1-8, choose the answer (A, B or C) which fits best
according to what you hear. There are two questions for each extract.

TO

You hear a woman talking about tourism.

1 What characterised the holidays provided by tour companies in the late twentieth century?

A They were tailored to the particular destination.
B_ They had inadequate safety precautions,
C They were ina predictably uniform environment.

2 Why did the tourists fail to find out about the countries they visited?

A The resorts were in isolated places.
B Tour companies made no Provision for this.
C Host countries were unprepared for them.

You hear a woman talking about a 16th-century map of London.

3 The map is not a true reflection of London because

A the only public buildings shown were churches.
B the pieces of the map did not make up a whole.
C the map-makers had limited drawing skills.

4 What was the main Purpose of the map?

A to patronise the arts
B to promote business in the city
C to reflect the buyers’ status

54


=== Page 55 ===

Paper 4 Listening

You hear part of a radio discussion about a new film.

5 What do the speakers agree about?

A_ the reason for making the film
B_ the effectiveness of the action scenes
C the inadequacy of the script

6 What is the man’s main criticism of the film?

A Itlacks suspense.
Bit lacks direction.
C_ It lacks originality.

You hear part of a radio programme about the 18th-century composer Handel.

7 According to the speaker, Handel’s operas were, until recently, regarded as

A models for modern composers.
B_ too conventional to stage.
C historical curiosities.

8 The speaker feels that the rigid 18th-century musical conventions can be

A used to emphasise the emotions of the singers.
B overcome by the development of modern singing styles.
C made less effective by different staging and direction.

RR)


=== Page 56 ===

Test 2

Part 2

You will hear part of a radio programme about the difficulties faced by witnesses and by the police
after a crime has been committed. For questions 9-17, complete the sentences with a word or short
phrase.

Witnesses often need to remember details of fast-moving events which

happened in very situations.

analysis was the basis of the old ‘photofit’
identity system.

Witnesses now build up facial features on a

|

The police practice of conducting

to create a good likeness.

has not proved very successful.

Witnesses are generally more able to recognise someone of the same

L

from among the suspects.

Surprisingly, the of witnesses is not always a good

indication of their reliability.

Experiments have shown that

memory deteriorates in older people.

Older people are often confused about the

[|

Additional communication problems between police and witnesses

of their memory.

may be caused by both age and | differences.

56


=== Page 57 ===

Paper 4 Listening

Part 3

You will hear a radio interview with Diana Boardman, the manager of an orchestra.
For questions 18-22, choose the answer (A, B, C or D) which fits best according to what you hear.

18 Diana feels that her orchestra is special because

it benefits from a long history.

her players are skilled in many areas.

it is known for a particular type of music.
she has associated with the right people.

UNDP,

19 Diana says that her concerts

are better attended than most.
consist of a mix of music types.
can be interpreted in two ways.
have a high risk element to them.

9003,

20 According to Diana, it is important to

move towards a change in musical traditions.
distinguish classical music from other art forms.
understand the past influences on music.
recognise the role of women in the history of music.

ouOWpY

21 Diana feels that the number of men in classical music audiences

should come as no surprise.

is generally underestimated.
reflects how things have changed.
is difficult to explain.

9000 bm

22 Why did Diana decide to make arts administration her career?

>

It was a subject she had studied.

B It proved to be satisfying.

C She likes a competitive atmosphere.

D Influential colleagues recommended it.

57


=== Page 58 ===

Test 2

Part 4

You will hear Colin Beattie, the presenter of a radio arts programme, talking to Annie Watson, a critic,
about a new TV drama series which stars an actor called Richard Garrard. For questions 23-28,

decide whether the opinions are expressed by only one of the speakers, or whether the speakers
agree.

Write A for Annie,
C for Colin,
or B_ for Both, where they agree.

23 Garrard plays villains particularly well.

24 There is little new about Garrard’s latest role.

25 One point in favour of the new series is its location.

26 One part of the series has been successfully exploited for promotional purposes.

27 The first episode of the series was quite moving at times.

28 The new series moves at too leisurely a pace.

58


=== Page 59 ===

Paper 5 Speaking

PAPER 5 SPEAKING (19 minutes)

There are two examiners. One (the interlocutor) conducts the test, providing you with the necessary
materials and explaining what you have to do. The other examiner (the assessor) will be introduced
to you, but then takes no further part in the interaction.

Part 1 (3 minutes)

The interlocutor first asks you and your partner a few questions which focus on information about
yourselves and personal opinions.

Part 2 (4 minutes)

In this part of the test you and your partner are asked to talk together. The interlocutor places a
set of pictures on the table in front of you. There may be only one picture in the set or as many as
seven pictures. This stimulus provides the basis for a discussion. The interlocutor first asks an
introductory question which focuses on two of the pictures (or in the case of a single picture, on
aspects of the picture). After about a minute, the interlocutor gives you both a decision-making task
based on the same set of pictures.

The pictures for Part 2 are on pages C4—C5 of the colour section.

Part 3 (12 minutes)

You are each given the opportunity to talk for two minutes, to comment after your partner has
spoken and to take part in a more general discussion.

The interlocutor gives you a card with a question written on it and asks you to talk about it for
two minutes. After you have spoken, your partner is first asked to comment and then the
interlocutor asks you both another question related to the topic on the card. This procedure is
repeated, so that your partner receives a card and speaks for two minutes, you are given an
opportunity to comment and a follow-up question is asked.

Finally, the interlocutor asks some further questions, which leads to a discussion on a general
theme related to the subjects already covered in Part 3.

The cards for Part 3 are on pages C2 and C10 of the colour section.

59


=== Page 60 ===

Test 3
PAPER 1 READING (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1

For questions 1~18, read the three texts below and decide which answer (A, B, C or D) best fits
each gap.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

Amateur Astronomy

Many things have changed in astronomy over the past half-century. Until about 30 years ago, there
was a great (1) .... of charts and catalogues. Telescopic equipment was limited and there were few
books on practical astronomy. Today, the range of off-the-shelf telescopes and equipment covers
almost everything one could need. Electronic calculators and computers have revolutionised

almanacs and chart production, and (2) .... the analysis of observations and the publication of
results.

All this must surely make this the golden (3) .... of amateur astronomy. Well, perhaps, but a great
deal has been lost as well. Now one may have to travel 80 km to find a sky comparable to that found
in urban areas 50 years ago. The daytime skies are now (4) .... by aircraft condensation trails which
can (5) .... for hours and often spread out to form amorphous clouds, making solar observations
impossible and (6) .... night-time observation too.

1 A deficiency B shortfall C inadequacy D shortage

2 A facilitated B maximised C cultivated D upheld

3 A period B age C time D term

4 A bothered B plagued C troubled D badgered
5 A proceed B pursue C prolong D persist

6 A hampering B smothering C overcoming D combating

Too Much Choice

Society is becoming ‘overchoiced’. There are too many things to do, too many options, too many
opportunities. In the new economy, the desire for the new product, service or next big thing is an

60


=== Page 61 ===

Paper1 Reading

addiction, and technology simply accelerates the (7) .... of change: the noise, the (8) .... of new
goods and services, offering more and more choice. No sooner has the new product emerged off
this virtual production line than the next one is about to be (9) ..... The head spins, the brain races,
the fatigue (10) ....; the disconnection from life begins.

Choice is the mantra of the new economy, but more choice means more stress, less time and more
complexity. Hence a new trend is (11) ..... The search is on for ‘simplexity’— the simple things that
give meaning in an increasingly complex world. But simplifying your life is not easy in an age of
economic excess. There are more basic brands of detergent and breakfast cereals than we can ever
need or want, more software upgrades, features and calling plans than we can keep (12) .... of.

7 A motion B step C pace D movement

8 A proliferation B escalation C extension D augmentation
9 A initiated B embarked C instituted D launched

10 A setsin B gives in C sets up D gives up

11 A aground B afoot C abreast D afire

12 A track B sight C trace D hold

McAndrews Hotel

Every summer we spend a fortnight in McAndrews Hotel in North Mayo, Ireland. It is a family
tradition, (13) .... by my grandmother, and by now it has achieved a certain sacredness. Nothing is
allowed to interfere with the ritual. We are of a kind, McAndrews clientele: old-fashioned, odd
perhaps, some would say snobbish. | do not like the bad manners, the insolence of shop assistants
which (14) .... for egalitarianism in this present age; | resent chummy overtures from waiters who
sometimes appear to (15) .... themselves with difficulty from slapping one on the back. | know most
of my fellow-guests’ names — like me they have been coming here since they were children — yet
can (16) .... assured that when | meet any of them in any part of the hotel, I shall be spared all social
intercourse (17) ....a civil word of greeting. Such respect for dignity and personal privacy is (18) ....
to come by in commercial establishments these days.

13 A constructed

B prompted C heralded D instigated
14 A passes B poses C claims D serves
15 A restrict B repress C restrain D retract
16 A stand B rest Cc stay D keep
17 A ontop of B rather than C as much as D apart from
18 A slow B rare Cc hard D seldom

61


=== Page 62 ===

Test 3

You are going to read four extracts which are all concerned in some wa’

Part 2

19-26, choose the answer (A, B, C or D) which you think fits best according to the text.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

19

20

62

The Actor’s Craft

Derision and contempt are sprayed at actors from time to time. Much of this
disdain is fuelled by the actors themselves when they’re compelled by their
film/theatre companies to talk about their craft (and themselves) in interviews.
They should give the dancer Pavlova’s reply to the man who asked her what she
meant when she was dancing: ‘If | could tell you,’ she said, ‘I wouldn’t dance it.’
But instead they all too easily fall into ponderous clichés, silly truisms or into the
prurient jaws of the gossip machine. We should all pay heed to what Paul Scofield
said in a letter to a friend of mine: ‘I have found that an actor’s work has life and
interest only in its execution. It seems to wither away in discussion and become
emptily theoretical and insubstantial. It has no rules (except perhaps audibility).
With every play and every playwright the actor starts from scratch, as if he or she
knows nothing and proceeds to learn afresh every time ~— growing with the
relationships of the characters and the insights of the writer. When the play has
finished its run, he’s empty until the next time. And it’s the emptiness which is, I
find, apparent in any discussion of theatre work.’

What does Pavlova’s remark reveal about artists and performance?

A Many artists are inarticulate.

B_ The performance speaks for itself.

C Artists are unwilling to share the secrets of their craft.
D Indirect comments best describe their work.

What justification does the writer find for the disrespect in which actors are held?

A Actors refuse to tell the truth about what they do.

B Actors tell interviewers what their employers want them to.

C Actors give interviewers the sense they are acting under compulsion.
D Actors are unable to avoid making inappropriate remarks.

y with acting. For questions


=== Page 63 ===

4

Paper 1 Reading

A review of Hamlet

Adrian Lester's Hamlet is poised precariously between boyhood and manhood, and it is
a performance of thrilling simplicity and assurance. His handling of the text and his
physical and psychological self-control take him, in one leap, from brilliantly promising
to frontline player: an actor with the intelligent confidence to be almost self-effacing
Lester plays an edgy, tetchy young man who feeds on a banked-down sense of anger;
agile, watchful and driven, he deploys a sense of acid wit and generous humour that
makes him both formidable and lovable. Although played down, the virtuosity of this
performance is unmistakable. Observe Lester's body, the way his arms hang stiffly, giving
you a sense of a figure waiting to be animated. Handy’s portrayal of Horatio gives you a
similar feeling of a body being moved by an inner force that he both knows and does not
know. So what is acting? What is behaviour? Is the former an imitation or an evocation
of the latter? Who and what animates these bodies, morally and physically? That is the
central question about the life of the theatre.

How has Adrian Lester's status been affected by playing the role of Hamlet?

He is confident enough to act simply.

He continues to exhibit potential as a performer.
He can now be regarded as a mature actor.

He has no need to flaunt his skills.

ououwur

In his performance of this role, Lester demonstrates

the power of anger on stage.

that great performances can be subdued.

the approach of a primarily comic actor.

that character emerges through interaction with others.

OY

oo

63


=== Page 64 ===

23

24

64

One director’s approach to
rehearsa

The first stage of this director’s rehearsal process is known as
‘dropping in’, a procedure which goes something like this. The stage
manager projects the script onto a screen. The actors sit quietly
while someone else is speaking, finding out what effect the words
are having, When it is their turn to speak, they glance at the screen,
digest the first phrase, think about what it means to them, wait to find
the impulse - the reason to speak - then speak. For example, the line
is, “Queuing all night, the rain, do you remember?’ Breathe. Let the
thought drop in with your breath. A memory, a vision, an impression.
Some people will imagine a queue, maybe at a bus stop on the way
to rehearsals or for a rock concert in their youth. Having visualised
the scene, find the impulse to speak it - what this director calls ‘the
pathway to the line’. lmoulses can come from without or within, Look
in the eyes of the other actor listening. Consider your character’s
situation. This director talks of ‘dropping in’ as a means of finding out
what is going on. Don’t pre-plan or pre-judge. Dare to go down
there with an empty mind and trust that something will happen to
you.

What individual input is required of the actor in the method known as ‘dropping in’?

A to produce a mental image to support the words
B to consider how the other actors are performing
C to generate interaction with the other actors

D to put trust in the director’s method

Before the actors start ‘dropping in’, the director requires them to

A study the whole text of the play.

B_ work outa preliminary view of their part.

C build up confidence about the eventual performance.
D abandon all preconceptions about their role.


=== Page 65 ===

Visual materials for Paper 5

C1


=== Page 66 ===

TEST 1

Which is preferable ~ working for yourself or working
for a big company?

* risks and rewards
* status
* personality

How important is it to go away on holiday?

* relaxation
* learning
* variety

How do the media help people to enjoy life?

* escapism
* knowledge
* variety

What abilities does a leader need?

* knowledge
* social skills
* strength



=== Page 67 ===

Visual materials for Paper 5

TEST 1 PAPER 5 New website — Promoting cycling



=== Page 68 ===

TEST 2 PAPER 5 TV Series — Importance of the past

2A



=== Page 69 ===

Visual materials for Paper 5

€5


=== Page 70 ===

TEST 3 PAPER 5

C6

Calendar promotion — Tourism


=== Page 71 ===

Visual materials for Paper 5

(7


=== Page 72 ===

TEST 4 PAPER 5 Book cover — Changing status of women

4A

C8


=== Page 73 ===

Visual materials for Paper 5



=== Page 74 ===

TEST 1

Prompt card 1b

When interviewing applicants for a job, what do
employers look for?

* knowledge
* experience
¢ image

TEST 2

Prompt card 2b

Which is a better way of escaping boredom, watching
television or reading books?

* time
* the subject
¢ imagination

TEST 3

Prompt card 3b.

What can affect people’s enjoyment of city life?

* atmosphere

* facilities
* size

TEST 4

Prompt card 4b

What is the point of learning a foreign language?

° work
° travel
* cultural reasons

C10


=== Page 75 ===

Visual materials for Paper 5

Which is it more important to develop, creative or
practical skills?

* work
* home
¢ leisure

C11


=== Page 76 ===

25

26

Paper 1

The Perfect Theatre

The perfect theatre should make you feel as if your presence has made a
difference. Going to the theatre, going to any live performance, is an
event and the staff need to have a sense of that, too. It’s terribly alienating
if you feel that it’s just any old job for the people working front of house.

The theatre itself needs to create a relationship between the performer
and the audience — no one in the audience should feel that they’re
getting an unreasonably prejudiced view of the actor. It’s important that
they’re not too far away, they can hear, they can see, they can feel in
some sense in contact with what’s going on on stage. The proportions of
an auditorium are important. They have to respond to the human voice
and the scale of the human body. If an auditorium dwarfs the human
body, there’s something wrong with it because you can’t deny the
human form at the heart of drama. A lot of theatres in the late nineteenth

century got it right because they managed to shape an auditorium that
somehow embraces the stage.

] like theatres that have a sense of the past in them. Like worn stone
steps in a church, you get the sense of layers of human presence. From
the point of view of the plays, you can’t have something for everybody.
You can’t second-guess an audience because they don’t know what
they're going to want to see. When you visit the theatre, you want

something done in a way you can’t imagine, otherwise you may as well
have stayed at home.

Reading

What does the writer regard as being essential from theatre personnel in contact with an

audience?

A an efficient approach to the job they do

B_ treating members of the audience as individuals
C a feeling that they too are also performers

D_ fostering a feeling of a special occasion

Why might the audience lack involvement with a play?

A They arrive with a negative viewpoint.

B_ They do not have the seats they expected.

C They are put off by the design of the theatre.
D They jail to relate to the play being performed.

65


=== Page 77 ===

Test 3

Part 3

You are going to read an extract froma newspaper article. Seven paragraphs have been removed
from the extract. Choose from the Paragraphs A-H the one which fits each gap (27-33). There is
one extra paragraph which you do not need to use.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

Joanna’s Lessons

Joanna MacGregor has a hectic schedule as a concert

for young children learning the piano?

Even a member of that mythical species, the
completely tone deaf, could not fail to be stirred by a
Joanna MacGregor performance. Simply to see her
zipping around a keyboard grabbing fistfuls of notes at
the behest of some unfeasible contemporary score is
to watch a pianist pushing the human frame to its limits,

How many veterans of the concert hall platform would
be floored by such a request? For Joanna MacGregor,
though, it was simply a hoot. ‘In his eyes, until | played
that, | hadn’t passed the test. | wasn'ta proper pianist.
Needless to say, she sailed through and doubtless
logged the experience for her next children’s recital.

There hardly seems to be a festival this summer she
is not gracing. Tomorrow she is in the thick of an all-
day collaboration between nine young composers and
artists. She runs her own recording label, Sound
Circus. And by her own admission, she cannot meet
an artist of any sort without being tempted to suggest
a joint project. So why on earth take on the extra
burden of writing a book?

20 |

In producing the first three books, MacGregor is
drawing on vivid experience. Between the ages of 18
and 25, before she was getting concert engagements
as a pianist, she taught a stream of beginners the
piano. But most important in her make-up now as a
musician who is unsurpassed in the breadth of her
eclectic repertoire was the endless procession of
small boys and girls traipsing into her childhood home,
where her mother taught the piano.

66

pianist. So why has she added the task of writing books

Just as everyone should be able to learn how to swim
or to speak a smattering of French, so, in her view,
should everybody be able to make a stab at learning
the piano. Some kids have a flair and make rapid
progress. She is fascinated by the others: those who
chug along at varying rates of Progress, enjoying it for
a while, but all too often giving up. This falling off
happens at any stage. Some kids find the beginning
too frustrating. Others rebel further down the line
when the stakes get higher and parental pressure is
driving them ‘to be like those children on the telly’.

The production of her own training manual begs an
obvious question. Does she have a poor opinion of the
existing corpus of tutor books, or indeed of the general
quality of piano teaching? ‘I’m very reluctant to
criticise other people’s teaching or others’ tutor books,’
she says. What she does do is readily accept that her
books, colourful and eye-catching though they are,
are by no means the only books on the market
designed to make the first steps enjoyable.

“You have to allow them to improvise and give them a
reason to play at either end of the keyboard and on the
black notes and use the pedals’ As progress is made,
bigger obstacles loom. Children need to be coaxed
quite hard to read the music rather than rely on ear.
Having relied for so much of her own childhood on her
very keen ear, MacGregor has considerable sympathy
on this score.


=== Page 78 ===

‘| have enormous sympathy with people who find it
difficult. | don’t think people talk about it enough’ The

Paper i Reading

secret, whether you do it for twenty minutes or five
hours, is to work out beforehand what it is you are
aiming to do, she says. Other tips: treat yourself — play
the whole piece through, however many wrong notes.
And mix hard with easy.

A MacGregor is rare among top-flight concert
pianists for the interest she takes in how young
children learn the instrument. She has just
published her own elementary piano tutor for
children: Joanna MacGregor's Piano World. And
she has managed it despite a crippling work
schedule.

B But she believes the single most important factor
is practice. How can children be persuaded to play
a passage even once again, let alone many times
over? She admits to not having practised
rigorously until she went to the Royal Academy of
Music, where she began building up a
contemporary repertoire whose formidable
difficulties demanded practice. Now she loves it.
The eight hours a day that she gets through are
the core of her musical life, she says, more
important than performances.

C ‘Not only was | fiddling around at the keyboard, but
there were all these other children of all
backgrounds wanting to play every sort of music —
bits of classical, jazz, pop, improvisation. | wasn't
part of that hothouse thing of forcing exceptional
talent. | grew up with the idea of trying to make
music available to peopie of all abilities.

D Her own special wheeze for luring these
neophytes, the fives, sixes and sevens, through
those bewildering times is to weave a storyline into
the books and their accompanying CDs. The
challenge at this fragile stage is to make the work
imeresting. And so, from lesson one, there are
accompaniments in a variety of styles for teacher —
or parent — to play beneath a child’s line. For kids
whose parents aren't pianists the accompaniments
ate recorded on the CDs. Learning should be
unadulterated fun, MacGregor insists.

E But even her dazzling virtuosity was not enough to
wow one small boy at a recent concert she gave
for kids. Like the rest of the audience, he had been
cascaded with bits and bobs of pieces in every
style from her vast repertoire of classical, jazz,
ragtime, blues, techno, African, etc. He’d coolly
watched her dive under the lid of the concert
grand to pluck the wires ~ normally a surefire
knockout for kids. Then as she drew breath and
invited questions, he piped up: ‘Can you play
Match of the Day?’

F And so the odyssey begins. It’s a {ong journey but
the first task for the young enthusiasts is easy, find
the Cs — they’re always to the left of the two black
keys. In Book 2, the characters fall inside the piano
and open up opportunities for making a whole lot
of weird noises. Something parents, unlike
MacGregor and the youngsters, may find a strain
on the eardrums.

G ‘I worry that some people use music, like sport, as
a way of making their children achieve things,
rather than just saying: it’s music, it’s there to
enjoy. The reason children fall by the wayside is
because they feel they are not going to match up
to their parents’ expectations.’

H_ ‘People who know me are clearly surprised. But |
think the very first lessons are absolutely crucial.
It says a lot about the music profession that we
tend to concentrate on the top end, on this idea of
the child as nascent virtuoso. Most people’s
interest in music is much more ordinary and
everyday, | find that far more interesting.

67


=== Page 79 ===

Test 3

Part 4

You are going to read an extract from a novel. For questions 34-40, choose the answer (A, B, C
or D) which you think fits best according to the text.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

We are talking Big Boots here. Really BIGTIME Boots.

| stood in my 800-dollar-each designer-label cowboy boots on the racks of an old formation in the Arizona desert sand. Money no object. |
wore the whole truly cowboy outfit and if you had the outfit you might be a cowboy. But | was not. It wasn’t working. | squinted into the
morning sun looking out at the Arizona mountains and | had to admit, | was not at home on the range.

Flying in from Denver just after dawn, | had the feeling that I just might pass for an ol’ cowhand coming in from the sky. The feeling didn’t
last past the first real cowboy in the luggage hall of Phoenix oirport. He was wearing o sweatstained Tshirt, needed o shave, and was hoisting
0 dirty canvas bag off the conveyer belt when he caught sight of my brand new cowboy boots. He slowly raised one eyebrow and moved off
out of the door without locking back.

There ought to be, somewhere, hanging in o closet, a suit of clothes an ex-racing driver can put on without feeling like he is from another
planet. Something he could wear so that wherever he goes he doesn’t get the feeling that everybody is talking another longuage and doing
whatever they do at half speed. | liked, no, not liked... | flatout foved being a racing driver, diving racing cars. | am addicted to it and itis al
| know how to do. But | don’t do it any more. | couldn't i | wanted to. Question is, | thought, looking into the mean, rustcoloured rock of the
mountains in the distance, what do | do now?

A racing driver should have one or two falt-back identities lined up for when he climbs out of his car. | thought | did, but when | reached for
them they just disappeared. How about: an ex-acing driver adds colour to the commentary direct from the trackside? ’We got fifteen guys, all
of them former Indy ond Formula One drivers, fifteen guys in front of you, Forrest, standing inline to be colour commentators, We'll cal you.’

Well then, how about: an exracing driver joins a partnership to sell dassic cars? That lasted nearly all winter with phone calls, lunches,
lawyers and meetings with bankers. But it was the year nobody was buying old Ferraris and Honda was ‘reviewing’ its dealer list. So in the end
| gracefully withdrew before there wos nothing to withdraw from. Being an ‘ex’ onything is depressing work. | mean you tell me; how badly
do you want fo hear about how | was almost the World Champion? Nobody wants to hear a story that ends in ‘almost’. And even if | had been
world champion you could probably just about stand to listen to the story for five minutes before your ears tuned to cement. Last year’s champion
was last year.

Not that | want sympathy. Which is just os well, since | don’t get any. Well, why should |? | had a good run, made maney and hung on fo
enough. But oh, man, | miss the heat of slipping into that graceful, elegant, shrink-wrapped super-tech machine with seven hundred horsepower
behind my neck. Zero to a hundred and fifty miles on hour in 4.9 seconds. And yes, | miss coming within an eyelash of killing myself every race
or so. | miss the bright and gorgeous people ond the reporters who acted as if what | said mottered. Being famous, even in o minor way, isn’t
all bad. Businessmen ond politicians bragged to their friends that they knew me. Little boys slid under fences to get my autograph. And now
that | don’t drive o racing cor... Only last week the phone rang twice. | have time in the morning and | have time in the afternoon. And let me
just check, but | think tomorrow is free. So much empty time.

| looked up into the soft blue morning sky. No buzzards overhead. Maybe Arizona doesn’t have buzzords. But a couple of little brown birds
in a saguaro cactus just in front of me were giving me advice; something like ‘get away from our nest before we sing our hearts out’. It had
never occurred to me that the desert had songbirds. It did occur to me that a bogus cowboy in designer boots had a lot to learn.

68


=== Page 80 ===

37

38

39

40

Paper1 Reading

How did the cowboy at Phoenix airport react to the narrator’s appearance?

900OUNPY

He was shocked.

He was unimpressed.
He was angered.

He was disturbed.

According to the narrator, ex-racing drivers in the company of others feel a sense of

wiemul |

superiority.
pride.
alienation.
failure.

The narrator did not get the first new job he tried for because

0OWU>

he was not so well qualified as others.
his contacts had misinformed him.

he applied at short notice.

his experience was not unique.

Why did the narrator give up selling cars?

90ON PY

He could see the future of the operation was bleak.
He did not enjoy the constant entertaining involved.
He felt unequal to the demands of the job.

He did not feel comfortable as a salesman.

When the narrator was a racing driver, he

090oO UY

enjoyed having his opinions respected.

was embarrassed by the attention he received.
used his position to make influential contacts.
had occasional fears for his personal safety.

What impression does the narrator try to create by using the phrase ‘And let me just check’ in
the penultimate paragraph?

o00OMUN QP

that he regrets finishing as a racing driver
that he is not open to new opportunities
that he has a busy schedule

that he is not enjoying life

As he looked at the birds on the cactus, the narrator

900U>

came to terms with his new life.

realised the extent of his ignorance.

felt apprehensive about making a new start.
decided this was not the place for him.

69


=== Page 81 ===

Test 3
PAPER 2. WRITING (2 hours)

Part 1

You must answer this question. Write your answer in 300-350 words in an appropriate style.

1 You see the announcement below on your college notice board and decide to submit a proposal.

The college will be putting on an exhibition entitled Great Achievers.
The exhibition will include famous people from all over the world who
have made contributions to public life in, for example, the arts, the
sciences, entertainment or sport.

Please submit a proposal suggesting a person whose achievements
you think should be considered for the exhibition. Say

¢ who you have chosen and why

¢ what aspects of his/her life should be included

¢ how the exhibition could best reflect his/her achievements.

Write your proposal.

70


=== Page 82 ===

Paper 2 Writing

Part 2

Write an answer to one of the questions 2-5 in this part. Write your answer in 300-350 words in an
appropriate style.

2 An international magazine for young people is running a series of articles on wedding
celebrations in different parts of the world. You decide to write an article for the magazine in which
you describe a typical wedding in your country, and explain what makes such weddings so special
and memorable.

Write your article.

3 In the film magazine Take One, there is a section where readers are invited to send in reviews of
very popular films. You wish to contribute by writing about a film you have seen which you think
will still be watched for many years to come, explaining why the film will continue to be successful.

Write your review.

4 You have recently read an article in your local newspaper about the fact that many people do not
use the town library. Write a letter to the newspaper suggesting ways of attracting more people
to the library. In the letter you should give possible reasons why people do not use the library. You
should include suggestions for improving existing facilities and providing new services.

Write your letter. Do not write any postal addresses.

5 Based on your reading of one of these books, write on one of the following:

(a) Brian Moore: The Colour of Blood
Your student magazine is running a feature on political thrillers and has asked readers to
send in reviews of books of this type which capture the interest of the reader. You decide to
send in a review of The Colour of Blood focusing on two episodes in the book, stating why
these two are particularly successful in building suspense and maintaining the reader’s
interest.
Write your review.

(b) L.P. Hartley: The Go-Between

‘Rather than bringing the people of the village together, the cricket match was a reminder
that the society of Leo’s childhood was still clearly divided by social class’ Write an essay
for your tutor considering how far you think this statement is true.

Write your essay.

(c) Chinua Achebe: Things Fall Apart
Your local reading group wants to study some books set in West Africa. Write a report for
the reading group suggesting Things Fall Apart. Your report should focus on the way the
lives of the people in Umuofia are governed by the beliefs and customs of their clan.

Write your report.

71


=== Page 83 ===

Test 3

PAPER 3 USE OF ENGLISH (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1

For questions 1-15, read the text below and think of the word which best fits each space. Use only -
one word in each space. There is an example at the beginning (0).

Write your answers in CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet.

example: [0] wiHllolise ILI oo

Food for a Future

published in 1975. In this classic work, a case was (1).........05 forward for (2).......00008 can only be
described as a more responsible and humane attitude towards the world’s food resources. It had
Gradually (3)..........6 clear to Wynne-Tyson that the economics and ecology of meat production did
NOt (4)... sense. What justification was (5)........0.. , he argued, for using seven tonnes of
cereal to produce one tonne of meat?

Even today, the book’s succinct style makes it compulsively readable. (6).........0 his approach is
basically an emotional one, Wynne-Tyson goes to great lengths to back (7)........0. every
Statement with considerable supporting evidence and statistical data. Thus, even ((:) of us
who are widely read (9).........005 the subject of vegetarianism will gain fresh insights from this book.
It is generally agreed that his most skilful achievement is the slow revelation of his main thesis
(10)... ae the arguments unfold. The book concludes that a move away from an animal-based
diet to (11)............ which is based on plant sources is inevitable in the long term, in (V2). reeeeees

of the fact that there is no sound nutritional, medical or social justification for meat-eating.

(13)...---eeeeee of whether you agree with (14)......s000 a conclusion or not, the book certainly makes
(15)... eee fascinating read.

72


=== Page 84 ===

Paper 3 Use of English

Part 2

For questions 16-25, read the text below. Use the word given in capitals at the end of some of the
lines to form a word that fits in the space in the same line. There is an example at the beginning (0).

Write your answers in CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet.

camo: (O}El x) isi TEIN cle IOI Oo

The Desire to Know

Curiosity goes back to the dawn of human (0)..EXISTENCE. . This irrepressible
desire to know is not a (16)..........08 of inanimate objects. Nor does it seem to
be attributable to some forms of living organism which, for that very reason, we
can scarcely bring ourselves to consider alive. A tree, for example, does not
display (17)..........0 curiosity, nor does a sponge or even an oyster. If chance
events bring them poison, predators or parasites, they die as (18)....--...08. as
they lived.

Early in the scheme of life, (19)............ motion was developed by some
organisms. It meant an (20).......0600 advance in their control of the environment.
A moving organism no longer waited in stolid (21)............ for food to come its
way, but went out after it. The individual that hesitated in the 7) eee search
for food, or that was overly (23)........00 in its investigation, starved.

As organisms grew more complex, more messages of greater variety were

received from and about the (24).........0. environment. At the same time, the
nervous system, the living instrument that interprets and stores the data
collected by the sense organs, became (25)......sse00 complex.

EXIST

CHARACTER

RECOGNISE

CEREMONIOUS

DEPEND
ORDINARY
RIGID
ZEAL
CONSERVE

ROUND

INCREASE

73


=== Page 85 ===

Test 3

Part 3

For questions 26-31, think of one word only which can be used appropriately in all three sentences.
Here is an example (0).

Example:

0 Some of the tourists are hoping to get compensation for the poor state of the hotel, and | think
they have @ Very ........cceeeeeeeeeeees ee case.
There’s no point in trying to wade across the river, the current is far too

If you’re asking me which of the candidates should get the job, I’m afraid | don’t have any

el siitiiklolvie OF JOD

Write only the missing word in CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet.

26 When he was in his nineties, the famous writer's health began to

If the potato crop were to ........... cee eeeeeee , it would create many problems for the local
people.
Please do not .............0ccccceeee eee to check the safety precautions for this device.

27) Inthe ........ eee term, this new proposal could mean a property tax with substantial

rebates for the poor.

Running up the stairs left her .........000......-..ceeee of breath.
The kids made ...............cccceee ees work of the cakes and ice-cream at the party.

28 Sven was the star... in the school revue with his impersonations of all the
teachers.
WI be MY... eee eeereee eee to cook a meal for us both next weekend.
Don’t drive too fast as you approach the next ................ccseeeeceee because there’s a sharp
embankment.

74


=== Page 86 ===

29

30

31

Paper 3 Use of English

When you take into 0.0.0... the difficulties they faced, you must admit the team
did well to come second.

After he had visited the theme park, Trevor gave us a detailed ..................sec000. of the
attractions.

Clara asked the shop assistant to charge the jacket to her

| thought | had a good solution to the problem, but my plan WaS ......-..cceccceccceseesese by the
director, who said it would be too expensive.

In many parts of the country, black clouds completely ..............cccccccsees out the sun, and
whole towns were cast into semi-darkness.

Enrico had to take a different route home because the main road WAS ...........ceccsseeeesseses by

a lorry which had overturned.

When | hesitated over the price, the salesman came up with a special

There is a great ...........eeeeceeeeeeeeee of rubbish at the bottom of the garden.

The two sides tried and failed to come to a

75


=== Page 87 ===

Test 3

Part 4

For questions 32-39, complete the second sentence so that it has a similar meaning to the first
sentence, using the word given. Do not change the word given. You must use between three and
eight words, including the word given.

Here is an example (0).
Example:

0 Do you mind if | watch you while you paint?

objection

DO YOU 2... ee cceeecceeeeceeeeeaeeesneeeeaeesseeseeseaeeeeeeeeaeeeeseeeeeas you while you paint?

Write only the missing words on the separate answer sheet.

32 Selena really has no idea of the difficulty of finding a parking place.

how

Little OCS oo... eee eee ee eeeecetaeeeeaateeetereseeeeereenaeneeaes find a parking place.

33 The first candidate impressed the interviewers immediately.

made

The first Candidate .5...........cccceccccccc ec cecececcueescucueesessesesasaueeenereneeesnes the interviewers.

34 ~~ ‘| felt relaxed at Gita’s house because her parents greeted me so warmly.

ease

Giita’S Parents ..... eect e cc teceeaeeeeeaeeeseeereeseeteseeseeeerns the warmth of their greeting.

76


=== Page 88 ===

35

36

37

38

39

Paper 3 Use of English

The area was completely devoid of vegetation.

whatsoever

THOT ooo. eecccccecececececesseansesauvecsasseaesssanseuerseueteuererress the area.

No matter what happens, we will never do business with that firm again.

ever

eo) ce with that firm again.

John concluded that he should take the job.

came

JOIN oo ee cee cece eseeecseeseeceseesceuuvseecauesensaesesanenss he should take the job.

Oskar didn’t feel like going out last night.

mood

10): oe last night.

The news that the Prime Minister had resigned came as a great shock to everyone.
aback

EVGryOne oo... cece cece eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeceeseeeceeeeeueesseceeeeeeeeegs Prime Minister’s resignation.

77


=== Page 89 ===

Test 3

Part 5

For questions 40-44, read the following texts on motoring. For questions 40-43, answer with a word
or short phrase. You do not need to write complete sentences. For question 44, write a summary
according to the instructions given.

Write your answers to questions 40—44 on the separate answer sheet.

How noisy do you like a car to be? For me, the quieter the better, but
evidently not everyone feels as I do. Recent research in the US and Europe
has shown that 80% of motorists like to hear some noises — especially from
the engine — as they drive.

Approximately 60% welcomed the blinking of indicators which provide
audible as well as visible confirmation that these are working. Other noise
sources - among them the horn and the sound of braking ~ were rated
relatively unimportant, as indeed was tyre rumble, which I for one find very
surprising. Cars have become so quiet mechanically, and far less prone to
create wind noise, that the boom and roar made by tyres running on
coarsely-textured road surfaces is now firmly at the top of my list of
motoring dislikes.

In the aforementioned research, participants were asked to listen to sound
samples obtained from a variety of engines running under different
conditions. The researchers wanted to know which engine-produced sounds
pleased drivers most. The results clearly showed that scientifically measured
and subjectively perceived sound qualities are not the same thing. The
difficulty facing car designers must be in deciding just how such customer
tastes vary according to the kinds of cars they have in mind. The buyer of a
top-of-the-range sports car would, they conclude, feel cheated if the powerful
engine did not sing like an operatic tenor at moderate speeds, and bellow like
a wild animal when the needle neared the red line. Such noises might, |
suppose, be anathema to the driver of a luxury saloon car, however.

line 8

line 16

40 In your own words, explain why the writer is annoyed by what he calls ‘tyre rumble’. (line 8)

41

78

Explain why ‘scientifically measured and subjectively perceived sound qualities are not the

same thing’. (line 16)


=== Page 90 ===

Paper 3 Use of English

A recent poll set out to discover the top ten driving tunes favoured by
motorists. The winner was Bohemian Rhapsody by the rock band
Queen, which heads a list of similarly rousing numbers from the era of
heavy rock music. Such ear-punching anthems have psychologists
shaking their heads — not in time to the beat, but in dismay. For this
sort of music, they warn, can cause aggressive driving. Armies used to
play martial drum beats to stir their troops into battle, and the effect
works in traffic too. If you hear pounding music that makes you want
to drive forward when all you can see is the back bumper of the car in
front, it's quite likely to raise both your blood pressure and your
frustration levels.

On the open road, fast music is going to make you want to drive faster.
It's also going to make you more aggressive, and that’s probably going
to mean that you're tempted to take more risks. These arguments are
supported by earlier research which examined the performance of
young people aged between 17 and 25. The report concluded that
unsafe drivers in this age group are more likely to go for up-tempo
music with a heavy bass.

But that wasn’t all. There was also evidence that loud music played in
a confined space, such as a car, could have the effect of blanking out
that part of the brain that performs logical reasoning.

line 7

42 Which word from the text best sums up the scientists’ attitude towards the results of the recent

43

44

poll?

Which word, used earlier in this text, anticipates the idea which is introduced by the verb ‘to

stir in line 7?

In a paragraph of 50-70 words, summarise in your own words as far as possible the various
ways in which, according to the research described in both texts, different types of sound affect

drivers. Write your summary on the separate answer sheet.

79


=== Page 91 ===

Test 3

PAPER 4 LISTENING (40 minutes approximately)

Part 1

You will hear four different extracts. For questions 1-8, choose the answer (A, B or C) which fits best
according to what you hear. There are two questions for each extract.

You hear a radio presenter introducing an item on transport.

1 What does the consultation document deal with?

A_ increased regulation of air traffic control
B difficulties facing the aviation industry
C economies to be made in airport management

2 What is the transport minister's aim when she speaks?

A to predict areas of potential national investment
B to discourage the public from flying so much in future
C_ to reduce people’s expectations of government action

In a radio play, you hear a woman talking about birthdays.

3 How did she react when her husband forgot her birthday?

A_ She realised that it was of no consequence.
B_ She became rather depressed.
C_ She felt slightly disappointed.

4 How does her birthday make her feel these days?
A sentimental
B_ optimistic
C regretful

80


=== Page 92 ===

Paper 4 Listening

You hear a radio discussion about science and technology museums.

5 The man differs from the woman in his opinion of

A_ the contents of a particular museum.
B_ the educational value of museums.
C the way museum exhibitions are designed.

6 The woman supports her argument by

A_ drawing on personal experience.

B_ supplying a series of examples.
C_ relying on research evidence.

You hear a reviewer talking about a historical novel which she has read recently.

7 Which aspect of the book does she single out for criticism?

A_ the accuracy of the historical background
B the style in which it is written
C_ the writer's attempts at comedy

8 What overall impression of the book does she express?

A_ It’s an insult to her intelligence.
B_ It shouldn’t be taken too seriously.
C_ It must have been written as a joke.

31


=== Page 93 ===

Test 3

Part 2

You will hear part of a radio talk about a small mammal called the brown hare. For questions 9~17,
complete the sentences with a word or short phrase.

The brown hare has often provided both

with ideas for their work.

A fall in the number of hares in Britain is a cause of concern for

During the day, hares are often found in areas where

The behaviour known as ‘pursuit deterrence’ is said to save the

give protection.

In Britain, hares are easiest to see in the month of i

partly because the days become longer.

Researchers were surprised to find that hares did not

seem better off as a result of developments in

The population distribution of hares across Britain is described as

An organisation called the

What's referred to as a |

has set up projects

aimed at helping hares.

has been produced to try to

reverse the fall in hare numbers in Britain.

82


=== Page 94 ===

Paper 4

Part 3

Listening

You will hear an interview with a British film director, Ann Howard, who has recently made a film in

Hollywood. For questions 18-22, choose the answer (A, B, C or D) which fits best according to what
you hear.

18

19

20

21

22

Why did Ann go to work in Hollywood?

She liked the studio system.

She needed to work independently.

Her aim was to make a film about Hollywood.
Her films were successful.

900OU>

What does she see as the main problem with the film she made in Hollywood?

A It was set in America.

B_ It was not meant to be a comedy.
Cit was rewritten in parts.

D_ Itused American actors.

On balance, she found the experience of directing the film

A depressing.
B_ confusing.
C rewarding.
D fascinating.

What is her main criticism of the preview system?

The audience is made up of film critics.

The films are not previewed in enough places.
The audiences go with the wrong attitude.
The questions asked are not appropriate.

90N0P

She feels that film previews are useful

as a marketing tool.

if the director uses the information.
when the audience pays to see them.
before films are shown on television.

OD >

oo

83


=== Page 95 ===

Test 3

Part 4

You will hear part of a radio discussion in which two friends, Frieda and Martin, are being interviewed
about tidiness. For questions 23-28, decide whether the Opinions are expressed by only one of the
speakers, or whether the speakers agree.

Write F for Frieda,
M_sfor Martin,
or B for Both, where they agree.

23 Tidiness was instilled in me as a child.

24 The decision to keep things isn’t based on their usefulness.

25 Parents’ attitudes to tidiness influence their children’s character.

26 Everyone has a different idea of what tidiness is.

27 Tidying doesn’t get in the way of work.

28 A person’s appearance is not a reliable indicator of their tidiness.

84


=== Page 96 ===

Paper 5 Speaking

PAPER5 SPEAKING (19 minutes)

There are two examiners. One (the interlocutor) conducts the test, providing you with the necessary
materials and explaining what you have to do. The other examiner (the assessor) will be introduced
to you, but then takes no further part in the interaction.

Part 1 (3 minutes)

The interlocutor first asks you and your partner a few questions which focus on information about
yourselves and personal opinions.

Part 2 (4 minutes)

In this part of the test you and your partner are asked to talk together. The interlocutor places a
set of pictures on the table in front of you. There may be only one picture in the set or as many as
seven pictures. This stimulus provides the basis for a discussion. The interlocutor first asks an
introductory question which focuses on two of the pictures (or in the case of a single picture, on
aspects of the picture). After about a minute, the interlocutor gives you both a decision-making task
based on the same set of pictures.

The pictures for Part 2 are on pages C6-C7 of the colour section.

Part 3 (12 minutes)

You are each given the opportunity to talk for two minutes, to comment after your partner has
spoken and to take part in a more general discussion.

The interlocutor gives you a card with a question written on it and asks you to talk about it for
two minutes. After you have spoken, your partner is first asked to comment and then the
interlocutor asks you both another question related to the topic on the card. This procedure is
repeated, so that your partner receives a card and speaks for two minutes, you are given an
opportunity to comment and a follow-up question is asked.

Finally, the interlocutor asks some further questions, which leads to a discussion on a general
theme related to the subjects already covered in Part 3.

The cards for Part 3 are on pages C2 and C10 of the colour section.

85


=== Page 97 ===

Test 4
PAPER 1 READING (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1

For questions 1-18, read the three texts below and decide which answer (A, B, C or D) best fits
each gap.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

Photography

When a photographer takes a photograph, he or she makes a selection of visual information that is
(1) .... by his or her technical and aesthetic skills, personal views and experience, together with a
(2) .... of social and cultural norms. And in the (3) .... of this book we shall see how these factors not
only affect the style, content and expression of a photograph, but also how those images are
perceived and responded to by the viewer. For example, we might consider that the (4) .... reader
of a newspaper will have an implicit understanding of the photographic images reproduced on the
page. But rather than accepting the photograph at face (5) ...., we might question whether it
accurately recorded the scene as it would have looked at the time. Or, in contrast, does it
communicate the photographer's point of view? Is it the (6) .... instant recorded that is of particular

importance, or should the photograph on the page be understood as a symbol to represent a state
of affairs in the world?

1 A concluded B imposed C determined D directed
2 A group B set C band D batch
3 A course B progress C means D process
4 A shallow B casual C slight D random
5 A regard B esteem C respect D value
6 A accurate B definite C precise D absolute

More than a game

Sport for me has always been more than just a game. The most successful people in sport have
total self-belief. You need tunnel (7) .... if you want to succeed in sport. There’s only one route to

86


=== Page 98 ===

Paper1 Reading

being the best and you have to put everything else to one (8) ..... Sport is ruthless and no one else
is going to do it for you. It’s sink or (9) .....

Sport has taught me personal discipline and determination, but it can also teach you the benefits of
working as one of a team. My sport allows and encourages you to (10) .... individually, yet it is a
team game and you have to balance these two aspects. It’s very much like life — you can succeed
as an individual, but you must never forget there are others around you.

Sport has given me a great deal — and not just financially. It has opened (11) .... for me and opened
my eyes, and I’ve seen things around the world that others will never see. But you also have to give
up a lot for those (12) .....

7 A sight B view C vision D outlook

8 A margin B side C part D edge

9 A swim B float C sail D drift

10 A outdo B surpass C outshine D excel

11 A gates B doors C windows D barriers

12 A supplemenis B tips C perks D complements

Tuning in

Some experiences (13) .... themselves so sharply on our memory that they form islands of clarity
in our recollection. For me, such a momentous (14) .... took place one night in California many years
ago, when | lay awake listening to the rapturous strains of a mockingbird singing from an invisible
(15) ....in one of the tall trees that were (16) .... around the suburban neighbourhood. | don’t suffer
from insomnia — it was the exquisite artistry of the singer that kept me awake. As | followed his
intricately woven melodies, | found myself (17) .... into an unexpected aesthetic environment. In
order to follow the patterns that issued from the bird, | had to call on my experience of jazz and Indian
classical music. The bird had me (18) .... that | was being treated to an ad lib performance of the
most breathtaking improvisational acrobatics. | groaned and | cheered as one improbable musical
variation followed another through the open window where | lay listening, until finally | fell asleep.

13 A etch B scratch C trace D cut

14 A proceeding B circumstance C development D occasion
15 A venue B location C situation D area

16 A spotted B dabbed C dotted D flecked
17 A engaged B captivated C pushed D drawn

18 A prevailed B proved C convinced D confirmed

87


=== Page 99 ===

Test 4

You are going to read four extracts which are all concerned in some way with holidays and travel.
For questions 19-26, choose the answer (A, B, C or D) which you think fits best according to the

Part 2

text.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

19

20

88

Holiday reading

Summer promises us two of life’s great joys: escaping home and reading books — joys
that are, of course, intimately connected. Books may help us to feel more at home in the
world at large. We can relate our experiences to those described in great books written
long ago or in distant lands because there are fewer human types than there are people.
In the books of others, we find our own thoughts, embarrassments and dramas. Authors
can locate words to depict a situation we thought ourselves alone in feeling, or can express
our very own thoughts, but with a clarity and psychological accuracy we could not match.
What was shy and confused within us is unapologetically and cogently phrased in them,
a congruence all the more striking if the work was written by someone in a far-flung place
or in another age. We feel grateful to these strangers for reminding us of who we are.

Through reading and travel, we escape the deadening effect of habit. Our eyes are
never more open than during our first few days in a new place: except perhaps during
our reading of a great book, which guides us to the interest of things we had previously
ignored. Our mind is like a radar newly attuned to pick up certain objects floating
through consciousness. Our attention is drawn to the shades of the sky, to the
changeability of a face, to the hypocrisy of a friend, or to a submerged sadness about a
situation that we had previously not even known we could feel sad about.

What does the author find especially remarkable about great books?

their uniqueness and creativity
their timelessness and universality
their emotion and sentimentality
their subtlety and complexity

00MN>

What beneficial effect do holidays and books share?

A_ They heighten people’s sensitivity.

B_ They transport us into a new world.

C_ They restore balance to people’s lives.

D_ They make people more positive in their outlook.


=== Page 100 ===

21

22

Paper 1

Author’s Note

hese travel reflections were all

published as articles in the

Observer newspaper over a
seven-year period. Here and there I
have restored some small cuts by the
editor, which had to be made if the
piece was to fit the page, but otherwise
I have added very little. The occasional
outright howler has been corrected, but
only if it was a matter of detail which I
should have got right in the first place.
Hindsight would have allowed further
improvements, but there would have
been no end to the process. In the
second article about China, for
example, it seemed likely at the time,
and for some time after, that the Hong
Kong dollar would hold up. A year

later it fell. If 1 were to rewrite the piece
so as to predict this fact, it would
become a claim to prescience, or at any
rate no Jonger a report written at that
moment. But like any other flying
visitor, in South East Asia or anywhere
else, 1 was there at that moment,
ignorant as to what would happen
next, and fully occupied with making
the most elementary sense of what had
happened already. That has been the
real story of mass jet travel: the world
opening up to people who have no
qualifications for exploring it except
the price of a ticket. But I have never
been able to believe that all my fellow
travellers were quite blind. Even a
postcard can be written with a purpose.

in making his articles suitable for publication in a book, the writer has

combined some shorter extracts.
changed some factual mistakes.

00OuU>

incorporated some comments from his editor.
shortened some pieces for design reasons.

Why did the writer decide against further improvements to the articles?

000 p>

He fears any changes might be inaccurate.

He wanted to retain his original feeling of discovery.
Changes would have been too difficult to make.

The differences in style would have been too obvious.

Reading

89


=== Page 101 ===

Test 4

23

24

90

Ecotourism

If there were awards for tourism phrases that have been hijacked, diluted and
misused, then ‘ecotourism’ would earn top prize. The term first surfaced in the
early 1980s, reflecting a surge in environmental awareness and a realisation by
tour operators that many travellers wanted to believe their presence abroad
would not have a negative impact. It rapidly became the hottest marketing tag a
holiday could carry.

These days the ecotourism label has broadened out to cover anything from a
two-week tour living with remote tribes, to a one-hour motor boat trip through
an Australian gorge. In fact, any tour that involves cultural interaction, natural
beauty spots, wildlife or a dash of soft adventure is likely to be included in the
overflowing ecotourism folder. There is no doubt the original motives behind the
movement were honourable attempts to provide a way for those who cared to
make informed choices, but the lack of regulations and a standard industry
definition left many travellers lost in an ecotourism jungle.

Which words imply support of certain holidaymakers?

wanted to believe their presence abroad (line 4)

became the hottest marketing tag (line 5)

included in the overflowing ecotourism folder (lines 10-11)
cared to make informed choices (lines 12-13)

DOP

In the extract as a whole, what point is the writer making about the term ‘ecotourism’?

It is becoming less acceptable.

The initial intentions were misguided.

There is a lot of uncertainty about what it means.
A more precise term was originally rejected.

oom EP

line 4

line 5

line 10

line 12


=== Page 102 ===

25

26

Paper 1

Transylvanian Journey

The notebook covering the Transylvanian leg of my journey was lost for 50 years,
and only restored a few years ago by a great stroke of luck. It has been a great help
to me in reconstructing that period and committing it to print, but not the unfailing
prop it should have been. For in Transylvania I found myself having a much easier
time of it than I had planned, drifting from one hospitable country house to
another, often staying for weeks. When I came to a standstill during those long
halts, writing stopped too; as I was keeping a journal of travel, I wrongly thought
there was nothing to record. I was often slow to take it up again when I moved on
and, even then, jotted notes sometimes took the place of sustained narrative.
Fearing some details might have got out of sequence when I started writing the
present book, I surrounded these passages with a cloud of provisos and hedged
bets. Then the thought that these pages were not a guidebook persuaded me that it
didn’t matter very much, so I let the story tell itself free of debilitating caveats.

Which of the following statements about the writer's notebook is true?

It was not a completely reliable account of his journey,
It was published 50 years after the journey took place.
Much of the information in it was not relevant.

The handwriting proved difficult to read.

oOW >

In the second paragraph, what course of action did the writer take?

He worked on reordering some of the facts in the notebook.

He stated in the book that some of the facts might not be correct.
He abandoned his attempt to revise the text of the book.

He put in anecdotes to enhance the narrative of the book,

000}

Reading

91


=== Page 103 ===

Part 3

You are going to read an extract from a short story. Seven paragraphs have been removed from the
extract. Choose from the paragraphs A-H the one which fits each gap (27-33). There is one extra

paragraph which you do not need to use.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

Family Business

‘Look here, it’s no good!’ said my Dad. We were in the
car on the way back to London. My father, with my
brother Maurice in tow, had just collected me and my
trunk from the posh girls’ schoo! | attended. He had
also just sat through Parents’ Day, in the course of
which | was presented with the Latin prize and the
prize for the girl who had done best in her end-of-
school exams. He had had a long conversation with
my headteacher, and now here we were bound for
home and holidays.

‘So?’ | said, brazening it out. ‘Mightn’t that be
useful?’

‘| am also given to understand, he went on, and
then | knew the confrontation was coming, ‘that you
have ambitions to be a barrister. A barrister of all
things!’ My father knew quite a lot about barristers and
the law.

28 |

‘I don’t know about that, | said. ‘All | know is what |
see in television dramas.’

‘Be that as it may, he went on, pulling himself
together, ‘I feel your heart’s never going to be in the
business now. Obviously, you'll go to Oxford
University, and after that | can’t see you fancying it’

It was not as if my mother was around to lend a hand
- she had died early in my childhood and my father had
brought me and Maurice up. Maurice was two years
younger than | was, and because he was motherless,
early in our lives | got into the habit of taking care of
him. It was not a hardship. | loved Maurice. Because the
business was so successful we lived in a good deal of
luxury — in a big house in London, posh schools for both
of us, nice clothes, parties, theatres, operas. My father
knew all kinds of people — politicians, actors,
businessmen ~— and our house buzzed with good talk
and interesting encounters.

‘OK; | said, relieved to be spared immediate
choices and decisions, and especially the bout of
depression and sulks my father would sink into if |
opposed him. This was the way he controlled us. So it
happened. In my last term at school, and then on
vacations from university, | lent a hand, never more
than about twice a year, and always on the safer
assignments. | became one of the smarter
undergraduates, with a little house of my own, a small
but powerful white car, designer clothes, and a black
dress with a Paris label that | intended to wear when |
took my final exams.

‘It's too soon to know, | said feebly.

‘I tell you you're not going to want to join us, said my
father, who had an annoying way of usually being right
in such prophecies, ‘and it’s a pity because you’ve got
the gifts — the brains, the nerves, the vision.’

92

This was not to be. My father told me that, in about
a week, he needed me to do one last assignment for
him, that it was the most important piece of business
the family firm had ever attempted, and that he would
see that it was more than worth my while.

‘But Dad; | protested, ‘I've got my final exams
coming up, and | just need to concentrate on that. It’s
really important that | do well and | don’t want to have
to think about anything else just now:


=== Page 104 ===

Paper1 Reading

That was not all. As he described the procedures |

saw more clearly than ever before the single-
mindedness of my father — the clarity and

resourcefulness with which he set about his life’s
] work, the dynamic energy, the perfect self-control of
the man. In his way he was a sort of genius, and |
bowed to that in him. It made my own plans and hopes
seem less important.
‘All right, | said. ‘Pll do it?

OO eee

A It was in my last term that my father came up to E ‘There’s stil Maurice, | said, sullen. My father

see me and drove me out to a village for a meal
and a chat. There were only a few weeks to go. My
tutor predicted | would get a First Class degree (in
Law), and | knew that if | kept my head and spent
these last precious days carefully arranging
information in my mind, he might well be right. | felt
poised, confident, concentrated.

The trouble was that, like most children of
hereditary trades, | did feel confined by the family
expectations. | could see there were various
professions open to me, and | wanted to explore
the possibilities. At the same time, like a coward, |
didn’t want to upset my father. | wasn’t as
frightened of him as Maurice was — | was the
favourite — but | found him formidable.

‘Whatisn’t?’| said, though | had guessed the trend
of his thoughts from my father’s unusual silence.
He was a talkative man as a rule. ‘You can’t fool
me. You'll do what you want now, he said. ‘What
with all those certificates. | was told you will get a
scholarship to Oxford’

| was studying hard one day when a letter arrived
from Maurice. He mentioned that a friend had
asked him to join him in setting up a business, that
he was really attracted to the idea, but that Father
was against it. He wrote that Father was a danger
to us both and did not care about us as much as
he pretended. He wondered whether now was the
time for him to break free of Father.

snorted. We both knew Maurice hated the
business. ‘Anyway, | went on, ‘you could always
use me as a Sort of consultant.

| could tell that such pressures were simply
beyond my father’s imagination (or was it that he
was somehow jealous of my life away from him?)
and that he would interpret a refusal from me as a
heartless betrayal in his hour of need.

‘| just said that; ] said.‘ couldn’t think of anything
else to say!’

‘And apparently, he went on, ‘you have the right
sort of personality — you can pick the bones out of
a mass of material pretty quickly, you have the gift
of the gab and you enjoy performing.

‘| tell you what’ my father continued our
conversation. “You can go on helping us out in
holidays until you leave Oxford, and then if you
decide to leave us you can. It will give you a bit of
pocket money, and be a real help to me’

93


=== Page 105 ===

Test 4

Part 4

You are going to read an extract from a book about the mind. For questions 34—40, choose the
answer (A, B, C or D) which you think fits best according to the text.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

There are some activities that just will not be rushed. They take the time they take. If you ore late for a meeting, you con hurry. But
if you ore impatient with the mayonnaise and add the oil too quickly, it curdles. If you start tugging with frustration on a tangled
fishing line, the knot just becomes tighter. er =

The mind, too, works at different speeds. Some of its functions are performed at lightning speeds; others take seconds, minutes,
hours, days or even years to complete their course, Some can be speeded up — we can become quicker at solving crossword puzzles
or doing mental arithmetic. But others cannot be rushed, ond if they are, then they will break down, like the mayonnaise, or get
tangled up, like the fishing line. ‘Think fost; we need the results’ may sometimes be as absurd a notion, or at least as
counterproductive, as the attempt to cram a night's rest into half the time. We learn, think and know in a variety of ways, and these
modes of the mind operate at different speeds, and are good for different mental jobs. ‘He who hesitates is lost,’ says one proverb.
‘Look hefore you leap,’ says another. And both are true. line 10

Roughly speaking, the mind possesses three different processing speeds. The first is foster than thought. Some situations demand
an unselfconscious, instantaneous reaction. When my motorbike skidded on a wet road in London some years ago, my brain and
my body immediately choreographed for me an intricate and effective set of movements that enabled me to keep my seat — and
it was only after the action was all over that iiy conscious mind Gnd my emotions started to catch up. Neither a concert pianist nor
an Olympic fencer has time to figure out what to do next. There is o kind of ‘intelligence’ that works more rapidly than thinking.
This mode of fast physical intelligence could be called our ‘wits’. (The five senses were originally known as ‘the five wits’)

Then there is thought itself: the sort of intelligence which does involve figuring matters out, weighing up the pros and cons,
constructing arguments ond solving problems. A mechanic working out why on engine will not fire, a scientist trying to interpret on
intriguing experimental result, a student wrestling with an assignment: all are employing a way of knowing that relies on reason
and logic, on deliberate conscious thinking. We often call this kind of intelligence ‘intellect’. Someone who is good at solving these
sorts of problems we call ‘bright’ or ‘clever’.

But below this, there is another mental register that proceeds more slowly still. It is often less purposeful and clear-cut, more
playful, leisurely or dreamy. In this mode we are ruminating or mulling things over; being contemplative or meditative. Perched on
a seaside rock, lost in the sound and the motion of the surf, or hovering just on the brink of sleep or waking, we ore in o different
mental mode from the one we find ourselves in as we plan a meal or dictate o letter. This leisurely, apporently aimless, way of
knowing and experiencing is just os intelligent os the other, faster ones. Allowing the mind time to meander is not 0 luxury thot con
safely be cut back as life or work gets more demanding. On the contrary, thinking slowly is a vital part of the cognitive armoury. line 27
We need the fortoise mind just as much as we need the hare brain.

Some kinds of everyday predicament ore better, more effectively approached with a slow mind. Some mysteries con only be
penetrated with o relaxed, unquesting mental attitude. Recent scientific study shows convincingly that the more patient, less
deliberate modes of mind are particularly suited to making sense of situations that are intricate, shodawy or ill defined. Deliberate
thinking works well when the problem is easily conceptualised. When we are trying to decide where to spend our holidays, it may
well be perfecily obvious what the parameters are. But when we are not sure what needs to be taken into account, or even which
questions fo pose — or when the issue is too subtle to be captured by the familiar categories of conscious thought —_we need recourse
to the tortoise mind. If the problem is how best to manage a difficult group of people at work, or whether to give up being o manager
completely and retrain os a teacher, we may be better advised to sit ond ponder than to search frantically for explanations and
solutions. This type of intelligence is associated with what we call creativity, or even ‘wisdom’. .

Poets have always known the limitations of conscious, deliberate thinking, and have sought to cultivate these slower, mistier ways
of knowing. Philosophers have written about the realms of the mind that lie beyond and beneath the conscious intellect, It is only
recently, however, that scientists have started to explore directly the slower, less deliberate ways of knowing. The hybrid discipline
of ‘cognitive science’ is reveating that the unconscious realms of the human mind will successfully accomplish o number of unusual,
interesting and important tasks if they are given the time. They will learn patterns of a degree of subflety which normal consciousness
cannot even see; make sense aut of situations that are too complex to analyse; and get fo the bottom of certain difficult issues much
more successfully than the questing intellect.

94


=== Page 106 ===

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

Paper1 Reading

What point is the writer making when he says ‘both are true’ (line 10)?

At least two different approaches to a problem are normally essential.
No one approach is appropriate for all problems.

Even contradictory sayings can be equally true.

Success in problem-solving is determined by speed.

oo uUpYP

The writer mentions the concert pianist and the Olympic fencer to demonstrate that

exceptional mental and practical skills are evident in different fields.
there is a mental process which functions faster than conscious thought.
C emotions are not involved in complex physical activity.

D_ the body functions independently of the mind in stressful situations.

a >

The writer believes ‘cleverness’ is rooted in

A. skills acquired through practice.

B the ability to explain the thinking process.
C the power of the subconscious mind.

D_ the power of rational thought.

The writer uses the phrase ‘On the contrary’ (line 27) to emphasise that a slower mode of
thought is

an alternative approach to managing stress.
indispensable to our mental apparatus.

a relaxing way of avoiding problems.

physicaily undemanding as a means of escape.

900OuP,

The writer implies that deliberate thought copes poorly with

complex situations.

any situation involving people.

trivial daily routines.

tasks with a strictly imposed time limit.

00M >

The writer advises that it is better to ‘sit and ponder’ a career change because this decision

will have long-lasting implications.

will have a major effect on other people.

cannot be based solely on rational thought.
cannot be made without reviewing one’s abilities.

00OM0>

In the final paragraph it is clear the writer believes ‘slow thinking’ enables us to

gain valuable insight into the past.

maintain our mental and emotional well-being.
outperform faster-thinking rivals.

acquire new insight in a range of disciplines.

00W PY

95


=== Page 107 ===

Test 4

PAPER 2. WRITING (2 hours)

Part 1

You must answer this question. Write your answer in 300-350 words in an appropriate style.

1 You have read the extract below in an international environmental magazine which has asked its
readers to contribute articles to a feature, entitled Crisis, what crisis?. You decide to write an
article responding to the points raised and expressing your own views.

‘Some scientists have suggested we are facing an
uncertain future and a possible global crisis. The
way many people live is seriously damaging the
environment and we know that some natural
resources are rapidly disappearing. Perhaps it is
not too late for people to change their lifestyle and
their attitudes to prevent further environmental
damage.’

Write your article.

96


=== Page 108 ===

Paper 2 Writing

Part 2

Write an answer to one of the questions 2-5 in this part. Write your answer in 300-350 words in an
appropriate style.

2 You have read a series of articles in an English language newspaper in which different writers
describe certain possessions, such as an old watch or a favourite item of clothing, which they
would never want to replace. The newspaper has asked readers to write letters about an object
of their own which they are equally fond of. Write a letter describing such an object and saying
why you want to keep it forever.

Write your letter. Do not write any postal addresses.

3 A large old building in your area is to be modernised and used for young people. The council has
invited proposals for the future uses of the building. As the representative of your local youth
group, you decide to send in a proposal. Your proposal should recommend two main functions for
the building and comment on how these would improve life for young people in the area.

Write your proposal.

4 You have read an article in an English language magazine entitled /t all worked out well in the end.

The writer described a difficult situation which ended up by being a positive experience. The
magazine has invited readers to send in articles with the same title. You decide to write an article
describing a similar experience of your own.

Write your article.

5 Based on your reading of one of these books, write on one of the following:
(a) Brian Moore: The Colour of Blood
In an essay for your tutor, you have been asked to choose three locations in The Colour of
Blood to show how Cardinal Bem’s character is revealed in the way he behaves in these
places.
Write your essay.

(b) L.P. Hartley: The Go-Between
Your local newspaper has invited readers to send in reviews of novels about children and
childhood. You decide to submit a review of The Go-Between. Your review should focus on
Leo, and comment on how he relates to the adult world which he encounters during his stay
at Brandham Hall.
Write your review.

(c) Chinua Achebe: Things Fall Apart
Your college library is planning an exhibition entitled When Different Cultures Meet,
featuring books exploring this theme. Write a report for the librarian on Things Fall Apart.
You should describe the different cultures, represented by Okonkwo and his people on the
one hand, and the missionaries and colonial governors on the other, assessing to what
extent they learn to understand each other in the course of the story.
Write your report.

97


=== Page 109 ===

Test 4

PAPER 3 USE OF ENGLISH (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1

For questions 1-15, read the text below and think of the word which best fits each space. Use only
one word in each space. There is an example at the beginning (0).

Write your answers in CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet.

example: (0 Iw HILT CHAN LIL

The Changing English Language

Speech is really so integral (1).....0...0 form of human activity that it cannot be regarded as an
entity (2)............ itself. For this reason, it is more exact to say that (3)............ generation behaves
linguistically in a slightly different manner from (4).........6.. predecessors.

Young people are impatient of (5)........:00 they often consider to be the stilted vocabulary and
pronunciation of (6)............ elders, and like to Show (7)........s008 up-to-date they are by using the
latest slang. (8)...........5 , as the years go by, some of that slang becomes standard usage. In any
case, people slowly grow far (9)............ receptive to linguistic novelties, (10)............ that by the
time they reach their forties, they decry the slovenly speech of the younger generation.

In this respect, language is a little (11)... fashions in dress. The informal clothes of one
generation become the everyday wear of the (12)........... . Similarly, just as many young doctors
and office workers (13).........:0 out their duties in casual clothes, so expressions which were once
confined (14)............ slang and familiar conversation are assimilated (15).........0. their normal
vocabulary.

98


=== Page 110 ===

Paper 3

Part 2

Use of English

For questions 16-25, read the text below. Use the word given in capitals at the end of some of the
lines to forma word that fits in the space in the same line. There is an example at the beginning (0).

Write your answers in CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet.

example: [0/[cllElIN [TRAM JILL

Mount Mulanje

of a range which comprises no fewer than twenty peaks over 2,500 metres. The
range is readily (16)............ by road and a day’s drive allows

& (17)... eee circumnavigation. More energetic visitors, particularly walkers
and climbers, are rewarded with an experience that is (18)............ .

Mulanje is a (19).........06 sight, visible for miles around. The giant slab of rock
appears to protrude almost vertically from the plain. This impression is borne out
by the existence of the longest sheer rockface in Africa, demanding for even the
most skilled (20)............ . The explanation for this dramatic geography lies in
the rock: a hard granite, very resistant to (21)........008 , which contrasts with the
softer rocks of the plains.

Most visitors remain on the lower, gentler slopes, making use of forest huts for
overnight accommodation. The trek up the foothills, along clearly defined paths,

is not overly (22)........---+ but may take up to a week. As the climate cools
gradually, almost (23)...-........ , with every few metres of altitude

gained, so the full (24)............ of fauna and flora is revealed in ail its

(25). .ccceeeeeee .

CENTRE

ACCESS
LEISURE
FORGET

BREATH

MOUNTAIN
ERODE

CHALLENGE
PERCEPTIBLE
DIVERSE
SPLENDID

99


=== Page 111 ===

Test 4

Part 3

For questions 26-31, think of one word only which can be used appropriately in all three sentences.
Here is an example (0).

Example:

0 Some of the tourists are hoping to get compensation for the poor state of the hotel, and | think
they have a VETY oo. eeeeeccceeeeeeees case.

There's no point in trying to wade across the river, the current is far too

If you’re asking me which of the candidates should get the job, I'm afraid | don’t have any

sesee ss eee ee a views either way.

lol slit Rone IAAL]

LU

Write only the missing word in CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet.

26

27

28

100

The two boys were sent home from school but told to ..........0...c eee back the next

morning.
The journalist was asked to ..........00...cceceeeeees on what had happened the previous night.
My brother seemed unwilling to .........0...ccccee eee the damage done to his car to the police.

Mr Brown has only recently been elected to the ............ccccccesseeeees of directors.

To my mind, an ironing ..........0...00. eee is a very mundane thing to give as a wedding
present.

The wood of this tree provides the basic raw material from which various types of
Sees MMM cose esse ease are manufactured.

Many athletes have more .............0cccceeeeeees ability than the current champion; his success
is due to his positive attitude and good coaching.

eels) to feel embarrassed when you do something stupid.

Honey is a completely .............000c0cc, product with an excellent reputation for boosting
the immune system.


=== Page 112 ===

29

30

31

Paper 3 Use of English

Yesterday morning, the Prime Minister made his first public... eee since the
elections.

You should never judge people by their .............cceeccceeceees .

The Winslow family gave every ...........c:ccscseeeseeece of being rich.

Once the ship gets out into open sea, the captain will
island.

eee 0 ee a course for the

This is a special type of cement that should ...........00...cccecec---s very quickly, and then we'll
be able to walk on it.

The new sales manager is determined to .........ceecccccsececeecss new targets for the company.
My Spanish is not all that ......00.....0cccee now as | haven’t used it for ages.

The f00d WAS SO .........ceceeeeseeeeeeeeee that it seemed to be burning my tongue.

The robbers drove off with the police in ..........-.cccceceeeeeeees pursuit.

101


=== Page 113 ===

Test 4

Part 4

For questions 32-39, complete the second sentence so that it has a similar meaning to the first
sentence, using the word given. Do not change the word given. You must use between three and
eight words, including the word given.

Here is an example (0).
Example:

Q Do you mind if ! watch you while you paint?

objection

DO YOU oe eee eee cece ceca eee eseeceecetea eee eeaeeeeeaeeeeegereetaeesesaes you while you paint?

Write only the missing words on the separate answer sheet.

32 Without the new training programme, Fred would never have made the first team.
it
HAD eee cceceeeeeereaeeea eee eeecaeeeaeseeeeeseeesseeeeteeeeaeeeneeene the new training programme,
Fred would never have made the first team.

33 ‘It's none of your business what | do with my money!’ Dimitra informed her father.

concern

Dimitra informed her father that what she
of his.

34 | was about to leave the office when Tomasso phoned.
point

|. BRR eee. ee ee, 2... ee. when Tomasso phoned.

102


=== Page 114 ===

35

36

37

38

39

Paper 3 Use of English

I had only just got into my car when | remembered | hadn't switched off the kitchen light.

sooner

NO woe eecececcseceseeseeseseesceecssacasecaueseeauesseuersceseesenens | remembered | hadn’t switched off
the kitchen light.

Denise completely ignored her elder sister’s advice.

notice

DONISE 0... cece cece cence eccuusueeeceuecuecceeeeceseeausuanetarseunsins her elder sister's advice.

Sally has run away from home before.
time

THIS iS 1... ce ecceeeeeeeeeseeceeeececeeeeeeeseaususevsnaneeseeeccesecereeraas away from home.

People know more about the books Henri writes than the songs he sings.

better

SeeHERRE essen eeeeesreresesss sss. ee ee, than as a singer.

| have been told that you have been late for work every day this week.

brought

| that you have been late for work
every day this week.

103


=== Page 115 ===

Test 4

Part 5
For questions 40-44, read the following texts on brands. For questions 40-43, answer with a word
or short phrase. You do not need to write complete sentences. For question 44, write a summary

according to the instructions given.

Write your answers to questions 40-44 on the separate answer sheet.

Brands now dominate our shopping habits, working lives and leisure activities. Corporate logos
abound, and this ‘brandscape’ in which we live is global: walk down a street inany city inthe world —_tine2
and there will be enough brands to make you feel athome.

The intrusion is not just physical: it is mental and spiritual. Research and surveys repeatedly show. -
that brands generate more trust than any institution. A successful brand offers consistency of
quality, a point of certainty in an uncertain world; insecure, we latch on to the familiar and
predictable. Brands are no longer simply about the qualities of the product orservice they sell, but
are promoted as a set of values. Consequently, we use brands and we decode the use of brands to
establish the status of others.

Now, as brands take on good causes, they are implicitly bidding to legitimise the corporation as a
morally and socially responsible institution. The aim is that the audience will overlook the human
exploitation and environmental waste invariably involved in the production of the goods, and
believe that the corporation is a good thing. Brands have become a philosophy, and when
consumers buy the brand, they buy into the philosophical stance of the corporation.

40 Explain why the writer has invented the word ‘brandscape’. (line 2)

41 Which verb in the text reveals that we judge people according to the brands they buy?

104


=== Page 116 ===

42

43

44

Paper 3 Use of English

On a Friday afternoon in a huge open-plan office in a customer call centre
located in a windy business park, twenty minutes from the nearest shop, there
is the subdued murmur of concerned customer service representatives handling
confused, demanding, anxious customers. Their patience does not falter. It is
hard, emotional labour for all 1,700 representatives and it goes on for eight-
hour shifts with half an hour for lunch and two fifteen-minute breaks. It requires
them to set aside every aspect of their character except an obliging, cheerful,
nothing-is-any-trouble manner. How do you motivate someone to be that
patient on what is a very low starting salary? The answer is the brand: if your
employees love the brand they'll work much, much harder.

Brands in the past decade have shifted from being solely about the relationship
between producer and customer to becoming one of the most important tools
to manage your workforce. The internal customers are as important an
audience for the brand as the external customers — you not only sell the brand
to the public, you are also selling it to your workforce, constantly. In this office,
desks are decorated with positive thinking slogans; the teams of twelve take all
their breaks together and social committees organise riotous evenings out. The
goal is to turn every employee into a brand champion, and what the
management want now from their workforce is passionate loyalty.

What does the pronoun ‘It’ refer to at the beginning of the sentence in line 4?

line 4

In a paragraph of 50-70 words, summarise in your own words as far as possible what both
texts say about the way in which brands influence our thinking. Write your summary on the

separate answer sheet.

105


=== Page 117 ===

Test 4

PAPER 4 LISTENING (40 minutes approximately)

Part 1

You will hear four different extracts. For questions 1-8, choose the answer (A, B or C) which fits best
according to what you hear. There are two questions for each extract.

You hear part of a radio interview in which a writer, Jim Burrett, is talking about science fiction.

1 Why, according to Jim Burrett, do critics not consider science fiction to be literature?

A_ The subjects are often too technical.
B_ They consider it as a lesser form of writing.
C It fails to explore the complexities of human interaction.

2 Jim Burrett explains that his science fiction writing deals with

A ancient and universal themes.
B_ what is going to happen to the world.
C_ the effect of technology on humans.

You hear part of a radio programme in which an academic is giving a talk on cats.

3 In the speaker's opinion, how did domestic cats become part of human communities?

A Cats chose to live in them.
B_ Farms offered a useful shelter for cats.
C_ Cats were introduced onto farms.

4 What is the speaker doing when he speaks?

A comparing wild and domestic cats
B_ describing the impact of cats on society
C giving historical information about cats

106


=== Page 118 ===

Paper4 Listening

You hear part of a discussion in which lan Johnson, a photojournalist, is talking about the problems
facing his profession.

5 What, according to lan, are the prospects for photojournalism?

A The quality of work produced seems to be declining.
B The demand for serious professional work is falling.
C The financial rewards demanded by the young are increasing.

6 In what way does lan think the public attitude to news is changing?

A People don’t want to read about disasters any more.
B_ The public want to get hold of news items instantly.
C Readers get bored of any news story very quickly.

You hear part of a talk on the subject of sound quality in concert halls.

7 What is the speaker involved in?

A_ managing the finances of a concert hall
B_ designing venues for musical performances
C_ recording concerts for classical orchestras

8 What is the speaker doing when she speaks?

A describing existing techniques
B_ suggesting innovative ideas
C comparing rival approaches

107


=== Page 119 ===

Test 4

Part 2

You will hear part of a radio programme about wildlife in which a researcher, Kevin Nelson, talks
about a type of duck called the mallard, which he has been studying. For questions 9-17, complete
the sentences with a word or short phrase.

At first, Kevin assumed it was the male duck’s

that attracted females.

The female ducks are attracted to males whose bills are coloured

=

The ducks find their food on the

and have no blemishes.

of the rivers and lakes where they live.

The coloration of the male duck’s bill can change according to its

The female ducks are more likely to be attacked by predators in the

period.

Amongst the

L

Kevin describes the seldom heard call of the male duck as

The female duck provides ducklings with both protection and

ducks, there is a disproportionate number of
males.

compared to that of the female.

during their first week of life.

Interestingly, when a mother is in

|

she frequently deserts her ducklings.

108


=== Page 120 ===

Paper 4 Listening

Part 3

You will hear an interview with Roland Brundy, the new chairman of the television channel GTV. For
questions 18-22, choose the answer (A, B, C or D) which fits best according to what you hear.

18 According to Roland Brundy, what will be the result of competition within the media?

a narrower range of programmes on GTV
the development of new technology

an increase in GTV’s staff numbers
greater potential for creativity

900OU >

19 Roland feels that in order to have ‘artistic’ standing, a channel needs

an awareness of history.

to build up expertise.
accomplished actors.

to buy expensive programmes.

00 UY

20 According to Roland, the main problem in reacting to competition is that

it is hard to avoid copying others.

all solutions are open to criticism.

viewers object to change.

it is hard to interpret the market accurately.

900UPY

21 How does Roland feel about the impact of technology?

sceptical
undecided
negative
fearful

900 >

22 Roland says that one problem with his type of work is that it is hard to

A_ adapt to change.

B_ operate objectively.

C judge its importance.
D measure your success.

109


=== Page 121 ===

Test 4

Part 4

You will hear part of a radio discussion in which two actors, William and Sonia, talk about their
profession. For questions 23-28, decide whether the opinions are expressed by only one of the
speakers, or whether the speakers agree.

Write W_ for William,
S$ for Sonia,
or B_ for Both, where they agree.

23 Learning the lines before rehearsals start is not the priority.

24 Preparing for a role tends to be demanding.

25 Good acting depends on interaction with the other actors.

26 | generally play a character in the same way in every performance of a play.

27 Actors have more control in plays than in films.

28 Detail is more significant in films than in plays.

110


=== Page 122 ===

Paper 5 Speaking

PAPER5 SPEAKING (19 minutes)

There are two examiners. One (the interlocutor) conducts the test, providing you with the necessary
materials and explaining what you have to do. The other examiner (the assessor) will be introduced
to you, but then takes no further part in the interaction.

Part 1 (3 minutes)

The interlocutor first asks you and your partner a few questions which focus on information about
yourselves and personal opinions.

Part 2 (4 minutes)

In this part of the test you and your partner are asked to talk together. The interlocutor places a
set of pictures on the table in front of you. There may be only one picture in the set or as many as
seven pictures. This stimulus provides the basis for a discussion. The interlocutor first asks an
introductory question which focuses on two of the pictures (or in the case of a single picture, on
aspects of the picture). After about a minute, the interlocutor gives you both a decision-making task
based on the same set of pictures.

The pictures for Part 2 are on pages C8—C9 of the colour section.

Part 3 (12 minutes)

You are each given the opportunity to talk for two minutes, to comment after your partner has
spoken and to take part in a more general discussion.

The interlocutor gives you a card with a question written on it and asks you to talk about it for
two minutes. After you have spoken, your partner is first asked to comment and then the
interlocutor asks you both another question related to the topic on the card. This procedure is
repeated, so that your partner receives a card and speaks for two minutes, you are given an
opportunity to comment and a follow-up question is asked.

Finally, the interlocutor asks some further questions, which leads to a discussion on a general
theme related to the subjects already covered in Part 3.

The cards for Part 3 are on pages C2, C10 and C11 of the colour section.

111


=== Page 123 ===

Paper 5 frames

Test 1

Note: In the examination, there will be both an assessor and an interlocutor in the

room.

The visual material for Part 2 is on page C3 in the colour section of the
Student’s Book. The prompt cards for Part 3 are on pages C2 and C10 in the
colour section of the Student’s Book.

Part1 (3 minutes)

Interlocutor:

Candidates:

Interlocutor:

Candidates
A&B:

Interlocutor:

Candidates
A&B:

112

Good morning/afternoon/evening. My name is ......... and this is
my colleague ......... . And your names are ......... ?

POR mene m rene mane rnerere sere mat eeeeaees = = == tee ew rerun narrranasenmeeeeeeacuccusaaes

Thank you. Could I have your mark sheets, please?

First of all, we'd like to know something about you.

Where are you from, (Candidate A)? And you, (Candidate B)?
Select a further question for each candidate:

¢ What do you do?

How much of your time do you spend studying English?
When do you expect to finish all your studies?

Do you live in this area?

Does it take you long to travel to your work/school/college?

BAER ade mee eee e ee meee e rere esse eam ne nese meee ree eee eH eee nase teu eae eres ses eb eterenerecee

Select a further question for each candidate:

¢ Thinking about where you live, could you tell us something
about the people who live in that area?

¢ Is there anything that makes you proud of the town you live in?

¢ How good are the entertainment facilities for young people in
your area?

* Can you tell us about the things that make you laugh?
Could you tell us something about your taste in music?

¢ Thinking about special occasions, how do you prefer to
celebrate your birthday?

i


=== Page 124 ===

Paper S frames

Interlocutor: Thank you. Now, we'd like to ask you what you think about one
or two things.

Select one or more questions for each candidate, as appropriate:

* What languages, apart from English, might be useful to you in
the future?
* Some people say that if you’re not comfortable using a
computer, it’ll soon be difficult to find a good job. Do you agree?
* Do you think any kind of letter writing will survive now email is
so common?
* If you could change one thing about the place you grew up in,
what would it be?
¢ Thinking about yourself, which do you think creates the
strongest memories, sights or sounds?
* How open-minded a person are you? . .. Why do you think this
is?
Candidates
A&B:

Interlocutor: Thank you.

Part 2 (4 minutes) New website — Promoting cycling

Interlocutor: Now, in this part of the test you’re going to do something together.
Here is a picture of a street scene.

Place picture sheet for Test 1 in front of the candidates.

First, I'd like you to look at the picture and talk together about
how representative this scene is of life today.

You have about a minute for this, so don’t worry if I interrupt you.

Candidates
A&B: [One minute.]

Interlocutor: Thank you. Now look at the picture again.

I'd like you to imagine that an international cycling organisation is
launching a new website to promote cycling. This picture was
considered for the website but was rejected.

Talk together about why you think the picture was rejected. Then
suggest some other images for the website which would promote
cycling more effectively.

You have about three minutes to talk about this.

Candidates
A&B: [Three minutes. |

Interlocutor: Thank you. Retrieve picture sheet.

113


=== Page 125 ===

Paper 5 frames

Part3 (12 minutes) Work and money

Interlocutor: _ Now, in this part of the test you’re each going to talk on your own
for about two minutes. You need to listen while your partner is
speaking because you'll be asked to comment afterwards.

So, (Candidate A), I’m going to give you a card with a question
written on it and I'd like you to tell us what you think. There are
also some ideas on the card for you to use if you like.

All right? Here is your card, and a copy for you, (Candidate B).
Hand over a copy of prompt card 1a to each candidate.

Remember, (Candidate A), you have about two minutes to talk
before we join in.
[Allow up to 10 seconds before saying, if necessary: Would you like
to begin now?]

Candidate A: [Two minutes.]

Interlocutor: Thank you.

Select one appropriate response question for Candidate B:
What do you think?
Is there anything you would like to add?

Is there anything you don’t agree with?
How does this differ from your experience?

Candidate B: [One minute.]

Interlocutor: | Address one of the following follow-up questions to both candidates:

¢ What makes a good employer?

¢ Would you prefer to work for a small family business or an
international company? ... Why?

¢ What’s the ideal size of a work team?

Candidates
A&B: [One minute.]

Interlocutor: Thank you. Retrieve cards.
Now (Candidate B), it’s your turn to be given a question.
Hand over a copy of prompt card 1b to both candidates.

Here is your card, and a copy for you, (Candidate A). Remember,
(Candidate B), you have about two minutes to tell us what you

think, and there are some ideas on the card for you to use if you
like. All right?

[Allow up to 10 seconds before saying, if necessary: Would you like
to begin now? |

Candidate B: [Two minutes.]

Interlocutor: Thank you.

114


=== Page 126 ===

Paper 5 frames

Select one appropriate response question for Candidate A:

What do you think?

Is there anything you would like to add?

Is there anything you don’t agree with?
How does this differ from your experience?

Candidate A: [One minute.]

Interlocutor: Address one of the following follow-up questions to both
candidates:

¢ Would you ever work for little or no pay?
© Would you advise a friend to choose a boring but well-paid job?
¢ Should people who do dangerous jobs be paid more?
Candidates
A&B: [One minute.]

Interlocutor: Thank you. Retrieve cards.

Interlocutor: Now, to finish the test, we’re going to talk about ‘work and money’
in general.

Address a selection of the following questions to both candidates:

* How easy is it for young people to find employment in your/this
country?

* It’s often felt that some people are grossly overpaid. Do you

agree?

Would the world be a better place without money?

Why are certain kinds of jobs disappearing?

What job skills should children be taught at school?

At what age should people start earning money? .. . And when

should they retire?

Candidates
A&B: [Four minutes. ]

Interlocutor: Thank you. That is the end of the test.

Test 2

Note: In the examination, there will be both an assessor and an interlocutor in the
room.

The visual material for Part 2 is on pages C4 and CS in the colour section of the
Student’s Book. The prompt cards for Part 3 are on pages C2 and C10 in the
colour section of the Student’s Book.

Part? (3 minutes)

Interlocutor: | Good morning/afternoon/evening. My name is ......... and this is
my colleague ......... . And your names are ......... ?

115


=== Page 127 ===

Paper 5 frames

Candidates:

Interlocutor: Thank you. Could I have your mark sheets, please?
First of all, we'd like to know something about you.
Where are you from, (Candidate A)? And you, (Candidate B)?

Select a further question for each candidate:

© What are you doing at the moment?

* Do you enjoy your work / your studies?

* What’s the best thing about the area that you come from?

* How much longer do you think you’ll be studying English?

* Do you know what job you'd like to be doing in five years’ time?
Candidates
A&B:

Interlocutor: Select a further question for each candidate:

* Do you think your education is/was good preparation for the
world of work?

¢ Can you tell us something about where you’re living now?
What, if anything, would you like to change about it?

* Could you tell us if there’s a particular time of year you
especially like?

¢ What about your hobbies? What’s your main interest?

¢ Are there any sports that you’re good at?

* What about food? If you eat out, what kind of restaurants do
you prefer?

Candidates
A&B:

Interlocutor: Thank you. Now, we’d like to ask you what you think about one
or two things.

Select one or more questions for each candidate, as appropriate:

*¢ How well can you learn a language without living in the country
concerned?

¢ Thinking about yourself, how representative are you of someone
from your country?

° Thinking about computers, how important do you think they
are in schools nowadays?

¢ How important is the place or environment where you study?

* How do you think your chosen area of work will change in the
future?

¢ Do you feel optimistic about the future? ... Why?

Candidates
A&B:

Interlocutor: Thank you.

116


=== Page 128 ===

Paper 5 frames

Part2 (4 minutes) TV series — Importance of the past

Interlocutor:

Now, in this part of the test you’re going to do something
together. Here are some pictures which show different aspects of
the past.

Place picture sheet for Test 2 in front of the candidates.
Select two of the pictures for the candidates to look at*.

First, I'd like you to look at pictures * and * and talk together
about what might attract people to these places.

You have about a minute for this, so don’t worry if I interrupt you.

Candidates

A&B: [One minute. ]

Interlocutor: | Thank you. Now look at all the pictures.
I'd like you to imagine that a series of five television documentaries
is being planned to illustrate the importance of the past. Each
photograph represents the focus of one programme.
Talk together about these aspects of the past and why they are
important. Then decide in which order the programmes should be
shown.
You have about three minutes to talk about this.

Candidates

A&B: [Three minutes. ]

Interlocutor: Thank you. Retrieve picture sheet.

Part3 (12 minutes) Escape

Interlocutor: —_ Now, in this part of the test you’re each going to talk on your own
for about two minutes. You need to listen while your partner is
speaking because you'll be asked to comment afterwards.
So, (Candidate A), ’'m going to give you a card with a question
written on it and I'd like you to tell us what you think. There are
also some ideas on the card for you to use if you like.
All right? Here is your card, and a copy for you, (Candidate B).
Hand over a copy of prompt card 2a to each candidate.
Remember, (Candidate A), you have about two minutes to talk
before we join in.
[Allow up to 10 seconds before saying, if necessary: Would you like
to begin now?]

Candidate A: [Two minutes.]

Interlocutor: Thank you.

117


=== Page 129 ===

Paper 5 frames

Candidate B:

Interlocutor:

Candidates
A&B:

Interlocutor:

Candidate B:

Interlocutor:

Candidate A:

Interlocutor:

118

Select one appropriate response question for Candidate B:

What do you think?

Is there anything you would like to add?

Is there anything you don’t agree with?
How does this differ from your experience?

[One minute.]

Address one of the following follow-up questions to both
candidates:

° What are the good things about going on holiday in your own
country?

* In what circumstances might people choose not to go on
holiday?
¢ Is it possible for a holiday to be too long?

[One minute.]

Thank you. Retrieve cards.

Now (Candidate B), it’s your turn to be given a question.
Hand over a copy of prompt card 2b to each candidate.

Here is your card, and a copy for you, (Candidate A). Remember,
(Candidate B), you have about two minutes to tell us what you

think, and there are some ideas on the card for you to use if you
like. All right?

[Allow up to 10 seconds before saying, if necessary: Would you like
to begin now?]

[Two minutes. ]

Thank you.

Select one appropriate response question for Candidate A:

What do you think?

Is there anything you would like to add?

Is there anything you don’t agree with?
How does this differ from your experience?

[One minute.]

Address one of the following follow-up questions to both
candidates:

* Asa young child, did you prefer reading books or watching
television?

¢ Should TV programmes for children always be educational as
well as entertaining?

e What do magazines offer that books don’t?


=== Page 130 ===

Candidates
A&B:

Interlocutor:

Interlocutor:

Candidates
A&B:

Interlocutor:

Test 3

Paper 5 frames

[One minute. ]

Thank you. Retrieve cards.

Now, to finish the test, we’re going to talk about ‘escape’ in
general.

Address a selection of the following questions to both candidates:

* Where do people go when they want to be alone?

* Why might young people feel the need to leave home?

* What are your strategies for dealing with pressure? ... Which
one works best?

* Some people say that daydreaming is laziness. What do you

think?

Do you think the need to escape from everyday life is getting

stronger? ... Why (not)?

¢ In monotonous jobs, what sort of rest and recreation should be
provided?

[Four minutes. |

Thank you. That is the end of the test.

Note: In the examination, there will be both an assessor and an interlocutor in the

room.

The visual material for Part 2 is on pages C6 and C7 in the colour section of the
Student’s Book. The prompt cards for Part 3 are on pages C2 and C10 in the
colour section of the Student’s Book.

Part? (3 minutes)

Interlocutor:

Candidates:

Interlocutor:

Good morning/afternoon/evening. My name is ......... and this is
my colleague ......... . And your names are ......... ?

Thank you. Could I have your mark sheets, please?

First of all, we'd like to know something about you.

Where are you from, (Candidate A)? And you, (Candidate B)?
Select a further question for each candidate:

* Are you working or studying at the moment?

° What do you particularly like or dislike about the area you come
from?

¢ Have you ever lived in another country?

119


=== Page 131 ===

Paper S frames

© Is it easy to travel around your area?
¢ Have you always lived in the same house or apartment?

Candidates
A S&B:

Interlocutor: Select a further question for each candidate:

© Let’s think about your free time. What are the entertainment
facilities like in your neighbourhood?

* Could you tell us how you like to spend your weekends?

¢ How important is going to the cinema for you?

* Let’s think about your neighbourhood. How easy is it to get to
know the people living near you?

* Could you tell us something about the way you’ve been taught
English?

¢ And what about your plans for the future? Do you have any
plans for the near future?

Candidates
A S&B:

Interlocutor: Thank you. Now, we'd like to ask you what you think about one
or two things.

Select one or more questions for each candidate, as appropriate:

¢ How important is it, do you think, to have a hobby?

° What do you most hope to achieve using your language skills?

¢ Thinking about your education, which teacher (has) made the
biggest impression on you?

* Thinking about where you live, how important are your
surroundings to you?

¢ What advice would you give to someone who is thinking of
moving to your area?

* Moving on to current affairs, do you keep up with the news? ...
How?

Candidates
ASB:

Interlocutor: © Thank you.

Part2 (4 minutes) Calendar promotion — Tourism

Interlocutor: | Now, in this part of the test you’re going to do something together.
Here are some pictures of one region of Britain.

Place picture sheet for Test 3 in front of the candidates.
Select two of the pictures for the candidates to look at”.

First, I'd like you to look at pictures * and * talk together about why
you think the people have chosen to go to these particular places.

You have about a minute for this, so don’t worry if I interrupt you.

120


=== Page 132 ===

Candidates
A&B:

Interlocutor:

Candidates
A S&B:

Interlocutor:

Paper 5 frames

[One minute.]
Thank you. Now look at all the pictures.

Id like you to imagine that the tourist board wants to produce a
calendar to promote this region.

‘Talk together about the features that the tourist board should
emphasise in order to bring in the most visitors. Then decide which
four pictures would be best for the calendar.

You have about three minutes to talk about this.

[Three minutes.]

Thank you. Retrieve picture sheet.

Part 3 (12 minutes) Enjoyment

Interlocutor:

Candidate A:

Interlocutor:

Candidate B:

Interlocutor:

Now, in this part of the test you’re going to talk on your own for
about two minutes. You need to listen while your partner is
speaking because you'll be asked to comment afterwards.

So, (Candidate A), I'm going to give you a card with a question
written on it and I'd like you to tell us what you think. There are
also some ideas on the card for you to use if you like.

All right? Here is your card, and a copy for you, (Candidate B).
Hand over a copy of prompt card 3a to each candidate.

Remember, (Candidate A), you have about two minutes to talk
before we join in.

[Allow up to 10 seconds before saying, if necessary: Would you like
to begin now?]

[Two minutes.]
Thank you.

Select one appropriate response question for Candidate B:

What do you think?

Is there anything you would like to add?

Is there anything you don’t agree with?
How does this differ from your experience?

[One minute.]

Address one of the following follow-up questions to both
candidates:

* What makes a book special for you?

* Do you think people enjoyed life more in the past without
television or radio?

¢ What is your favourite newspaper? ... Why?

121


=== Page 133 ===

Paper 5 frames

Candidates
A&B:

Interlocutor:

Candidate B:

Interlocutor:

Candidate A:

Interlocutor:

Candidates
A S&B:

Interlocutor:

Interlocutor:

Candidates
A&B:

Interlocutor:

122

[One minute.]

Thank you. Retrieve cards.

Now (Candidate B), it’s your turn to be given a question.
Hand over a copy of prompt card 3b to each candidate.

Here is your card, and a copy for you, (Candidate A). Remember,
(Candidate B), you have about two minutes to tell us what you

think, and there are some ideas on the card for you to use if you
like. All right?

[Allow up to 10 seconds before saying, if necessary: Would you like
to begin now?]

[Two minutes.]

Thank you.

Select one appropriate response question for Candidate A:
What do you think?

Is there anything you would like to add?

Is there anything you don’t agree with?

How does this differ from your experience?

[One minute.]

Address one of the following follow-up questions to both
candidates:

¢ How is our enjoyment of city life dependent on money?
© How attractive are cities to children?
© What change to your nearest city would you like to see?

[One minute.]

Thank you. Retrieve cards.

Now, to finish the test, we’re going to talk about ‘enjoyment’ in
general.

Address a selection of the following questions to both candidates:

Why do we laugh?

Can we only enjoy what we’re good at?

What about music and art? What role do they play in our lives?
How do people help each other to enjoy life?

How does our enjoyment of life change as we get older?

Some people choose not to experience new things. Why do you
think that is?

[Four minutes.]

Thank you. That is the end of the test.


=== Page 134 ===

Test 4

Paper 5 frames

Note: In the examination, there will be both an assessor and an interlocutor in the

room.

The visual material for Part 2 is on pages C8 and C9 in the colour section of the
Student’s Book. The prompt cards for Part 3 are on pages C2, C10 and C11 in the
colour section of the Student’s Book.

This test is also suitable for groups of three students.

Part 1 (3 minutes, or 4 minutes for groups of three)

Interlocutor:

Candidates:

Interlocutor:

Candidates
A, B [& C]:

Interlocutor:

Candidates
A, B [& C]:

Interlocutor:

Good morning/afternoon/evening. My name is ......... and this is
my colleague ......... . And your names are ......... ?

I a

Thank you. Could I have your mark sheets, please?

First of all, we'd like to know something about you.

Where are you from, (Candidate A)? And you, (Candidate B)?
[And you, (Candidate C)?]

Select a further question for each candidate:

Are you working or studying at the moment?

What do you particularly like or dislike about the area you come
from?

Have you ever lived in another country?

Does it take you long to travel to work/college every day?
Which other languages do you speak?

THON O eee eee er eee rene tree eee eee eee eet E aE EOE ETO S OEE One ee ee eee eee ete ee beet eees

Select a further question for each candidate:

* Can you tell us something about your educational background?
... What sort of school did you go to?

© What about teachers? Did you have a favourite?

¢ In your free time, is there a new activity or hobby you’d like to
take up?

© How important is sport in your life?

* Could you tell us something about the facilities in your
neighbourhood?

* Can you tell us why learning English is important to you?

Thank you. Now, we’d like to ask you what you think about one
or two things.

123


=== Page 135 ===

Paper 5 frames

Select one or more questions for each candidate, as appropriate:

* In your experience, how have the ways in which we learn
changed?

* You said you come from... . How would you like the
transport system there to be improved?

¢ What kind of environment would you choose to live in?

¢ Thinking about work, what do you think is more important in a
job — money or satisfaction?

* If you could buy one thing to make your life easier, what would
it be?

* Moving on to the future — how do you imagine you'll spend
your time when you’re a retired person?

Candidates
A, B [& C]:

Interlocutor: | Thank you.

Part 2 (4 minutes, or 6 minutes for groups of three)
Book cover — Changing status of women

Interlocutor: — Now, in this part of the test you’re going to do something together.
Here are some pictures of people.

Place picture sheet for Test 4 in front of the candidates.
Select two of the pictures for the candidates to look at*.

First, I'd like you to look at pictures * and * and talk together
about why the pictures might have been taken.

You have about a minute (two minutes) for this, so don’t worry if I
interrupt you.

Candidates
A, B[& C]: [One minute, or two minutes for groups of three.]

Interlocutor: — Thank you. Now look at all the pictures.

Id like you to imagine that a publisher is producing a book
entitled “The Changing Status of Women’ and wants two images
for the front cover.

Talk together about the messages these pictures convey about the
changing status of women. Then decide which two pictures would
help to sell most copies of the book.

You have about three minutes (four minutes) to talk about this.

Candidates
A, B[& C]: [Three minutes, or four minutes for groups of three.|

Interlocutor: Thank you. Retrieve picture sheet.

124


=== Page 136 ===

Paper 5 frames

Part3 (12 minutes, or 18 minutes for groups of three) Ability

Interlocutor:

Candidate A:

Interlocutor:

Candidate B:

Interlocutor:

Candidates
A, B [& C]:

Interlocutor:

Candidate B:

Now, in this part of the test you’re each going to talk on your own
for about two minutes. You need to listen while your partner is
speaking because you'll be asked to comment afterwards.

So, (Candidate A), I’m going to give you a card with a question
written on it and I'd like you to tell us what you think. There are
also some ideas on the card for you to use if you like.

All right? Here is your card, and a copy for you, (Candidate B [and
Candidate C]).

Hand over a copy of prompt card 4a to each candidate.

Remember, (Candidate A), you have about two minutes to talk
before we join in.

[Allow up to 10 seconds before saying, if necessary: Would you like
to begin now?]

[Two minutes. ]
Thank you.
Select one appropriate response question for Candidate B:

¢ What do you think?

* Is there anything you would like to add?

* Is there anything you don’t agree with?

* How does this differ from your experience?

[One minute.]

Address one of the following follow-up questions to both [all
three] candidates:

¢ Do we expect too much from our leaders?
¢ Is it possible for leadership to be shared?
¢ When should leaders retire?

[One minute.]

Thank you. Retrieve cards.

Now (Candidate B), it’s your turn to be given a question.
Hand over a copy of prompt card 4b to each candidate.

Here is your card, and a copy for you, (Candidate A [and
Candidate C]). Remember, (Candidate B), you have about two
minutes to tell us what you think, and there are some ideas on the
card for you to use if you like. All right?

[Allow up to 10 seconds before saying, if necessary: Would you like
to begin now?]

[Two minutes.]

125


=== Page 137 ===

Paper 5 frames

Interlocutor:

Candidate A
[or C]:

Interlocutor:

Candidates
A, B [& C]:

Interlocutor:

Candidate C:

Interlocutor:

Candidate A:

126

Thank you.

Select one appropriate response question for Candidate A [or C if a
group of three]:

What do you think?

Is there anything you would like to add?

Is there anything you don’t agree with?

How does this differ from your experience?

[One minute.]

Address one of the following follow-up questions to both [all
three] candidates:

¢ Has learning English made you think more about your own
language?

¢ Do you think minority languages will die out? ... Why (not)?

¢ Why do you think children find it easier than adults to learn a
foreign language?

[One minute. ]
Thank you. Retrieve cards.

For pairs of candidates, go directly to the final part of the test on
page 127. For groups of three, continue here.

Now (Candidate C), it’s your turn to be given a question.
Hand over a copy of prompt card 4c to all three candidates.

Here is your card, and a copy for you, (Candidate A and
Candidate B). Remember, (Candidate C), you have about two
minutes to tell us what you think, and there are some ideas on the
card for you to use if you like. All right?

[Allow up to 10 seconds before saying, if necessary: Would you like
to begin now?]

[Two minutes.}
Thank you.

Select one appropriate response question for Candidate A:

© What do you think?

¢ Is there anything you would like to add?

¢ Is there anything you don’t agree with?

¢ How does this differ from your experience?

[One minute.]


=== Page 138 ===

Interlocutor:

Candidates
A,B&C:

Interlocutor:

Interlocutor:

Candidates
A, B [& C]:

Interlocutor:

Paper 5 frames

Address one of the following follow-up questions to all three
candidates:

¢ What can people do now that they couldn’t do in previous
generations?

* Is there a particular skill or ability that you admire in other
people? ... (Why?)

* Which of your own abilities or skills do you value most?

[One minute.]

Thank you. Retrieve cards.

Now, to finish the test, we’re going to talk about ‘ability’ in
general.

Address a selection of the following questions to both [all three]
candidates:

* Do you think that the media enable us to develop an
understanding of other people?

¢ As we become more international, are we still able to hold on to
our own cultures? .. , (How?)

¢ What abilities do you need to be a good parent?

¢ What abilities should today’s young people be proud of?

* Should people be encouraged to develop their artistic abilities? . . .
Why (not)?

¢ What do we learn about ourselves from competing with others?

¢ To what extent are skills and abilities disappearing?

* Some people think we are all capable of learning anything. How
far do you agree?

[Four minutes, or six minutes for groups of three.]

Thank you. That is the end of the test.

127


=== Page 139 ===

Marks and results

Paper1 Reading

One mark is given for each correct answer in Part 1; two marks are given for each
correct answer in Parts 2-4. The total score is then weighted to 40 marks for the
whole Reading paper.

Paper 2 Writing

An impression mark is awarded to each piece of writing using the general mark
scheme. Examiners use band descriptors to assess language and task achievement.
Each piece of writing is assigned to a band between 0 and 5 and can be awarded
one of three performance levels within that band. For example, in Band 4, 4.1
represents weaker performance within Band 4; 4.2 represents typical performance
within Band 4; 4.3 represents strong performance within Band 4. Acceptable
performance at CPE level is represented by a Band 3. All tasks carry the same
maximum mark.

The general impression mark scheme is used in conjunction with a task-specific
mark scheme, which focuses on content, range of structures, vocabulary, organisation,
register and format and the effect on the target reader of a specific task.

American spelling and usage is acceptable.

Outstanding realisation of the task set:

* sophisticated use of an extensive range of vocabulary, collocation and
expression, entirely appropriate to the task set

effective use of stylistic devices; register and format wholly appropriate
impressive use of a wide range of structures

skilfully organised and coherent

excellent development of topic

minimal error

Impresses the reader and has a very positive effect.

Band 5

Good realisation of the task set:

* fluent and natural use of a wide range of vocabulary, collocation and
expression, successfully meeting the requirements of the task set
good use of stylistic devices; register and format appropriate
competent use of a wide range of structures

well organised and coherent

good development of topic

minor and unobtrusive errors

Has a positive effect on the reader.

Band 4

128


=== Page 140 ===

Marks and results

Satisfactory realisation of the task set:

Band 3

reasonably fluent and natural use of a range of vocabulary and expression,
adequate to the task set

evidence of stylistic devices; register and format generally appropriate
adequate range of structures

clearly organised and generally coherent

adequate coverage of topic

some non-impeding errors

Achieves the desired effect on the reader.

Inadequate attempt at the task set:

Band 2

limited and/or inaccurate range of vocabulary and expression

little evidence of stylistic devices; some attempt at appropriate register and
format

inadequate range of structures

some attempt at organisation, but lacks coherence
inadequate development of topic

a number of errors, which sometimes impede communication

Has a negative effect on the reader.

Poor attempt at the task set:

Band 1

severely limited and inaccurate range of vocabulary and expression

no evidence of stylistic devices; little or no attempt at appropriate register and
format

lack of structural range

poorly organised, leading to incoherence

little relevance to topic, and/or too short

numerous errors, which distract and often impede communication

Has a very negative effect on the reader.

Negligible or no attempt at the task set:

BandO- e

incomprehensible due to serious error

totally irrelevant

insufficient language to assess (fewer than 20% of the required number of
words — 60)

totally illegible

Paper 2 sample answers and examiner’s comments

The following pieces of writing have been selected from students’ answers. The
samples relate to tasks in Tests 1-4. Explanatory notes have been added to show
how the bands have been arrived at. The comments should be read in conjunction
with the task-specific mark schemes included in the Keys.

129


=== Page 141 ===

Marks and results

Sample A (Test 1, Question 1)

Ag we all know sport plays a very important role in people lives. I'm not saying about the
international championships or even inter-class competitions but about interesting activity giving
us personal satisfaction and opportunity to make a new friends.

This enjoyable aspect is often misunderstood by many people in the world. Many of them are taking
up a new Sport because of ambition to compete or winning. There’s nothing wrong with it, but
sometimes we are not able to recognise what's good for us; being too ambitious is disastorous for
ourselves and others around us.

My view about a big sport events is not totally clear yet, however, my aim is to put on the spot
such event ag international championship and to point out what's good or not about it.

First of all mags-media! | think TY, radio and algo daily mail are filled up with all this sports
informations wchich are acceptable by the major part of the community; by some of peple read
with pleasure but for great number seem to be boring. Such information are defenitely a lot more
pleasant than the reports about someone's death or plane crash however watching all day long
sport's transmisions on TV can be exteremely frustrating.

Secondly; I'd like to ask the question; is the competition between small and big country totally fair?
My answer is; Yes it is but on the other hand; bigger countries have a chance to vin more medals

as more people is taking a part of the competition. At the same time it doesn't mean that bigger
is better.

To sum up it is essential to express my own opinion about sports events. Nowedays sports
entertainments are very comercial as most of us see them as an ocassion of earning money and it is
somtimes a main reason why young people are taking up a new sport or are forced to do so by their
relatives. lon't it alarming? Young peple must understand that competitive aspect of sport is often
misleading. Something what we used to do with pleasure becomes our obsession or the sence of the
live. That's why disqualification or being the second is almost always a tragedy for the sports stars.

In my opinion sport shoud be rather a form of spending a free time than competing with others and
| hope that the aim of the sport which is good in its nature will convince many of us move into
some kind of activity.

Comments

Content
Points covered.

Range
Attempt at a range of expression.

Approptiacy of register and format
Appropriate.

Organisation and cohesion

Superficially follows a structure, but lacks internal cohesion and coherence.
Accuracy

Numerous basic errors which distract and often impede communication.

Target reader
Has a very negative effect.

Band 1

130


=== Page 142 ===

Marks and results

Sample B (Test 2, Question 3)

| wy town is one of the most beautiful places, so we try to promote it by organizing an
annual festival. It is called “Kornaria” and it takes place every summer. This festival
commemorates one of the best authors: Vitsentzo Kornaro.

Every June until the first days of September there are many events around different
subjects. To begin with, you are given the chance to go to the theatre which is
unusual in my area. It may be a dramatic play or one which has a good laugh and
sometimes you meet famous people, for examble actors, singers, politicians,
Secondly, the festival includes events of historical importance, speeches and
seminars are made by expert historians, and exhibitions of local things and
products. Besides, night events of folk music and dance are organised which attract
lots of local people and tourists. Moreover, (some) other activities of this festival
are sports events and painting.

In ty opinion, all the above events are important for local life and culture. Local
people try to do their best for this festival so they come very close and meet new
friends. Also, young people and tourists are informed about our culture, tradition,
lifestyle, morals and beliefs. Needless to say that it is financial helpful for my town
and many new plans are depended on it. | would like to remark that some people are
visiting our area only for that reagon.

In conclusion, “Kornaria” is an important factor for our close comunity and still has
lots of things to offer (to) everybody. It has been held for more than twenty years
and | guess it would be good to retain it. We would be happy to meet you in one of
those festivals in the future.

Comments

Content
Points all covered.

Range
Adequate range of structure and vocabulary.

Appropriacy of register and format
Appropriate register and format.

Organisation and cohesion
Attempt at organisation and cohesion.

Accuracy
A number of non-impeding errors.

Target reader
Would be informed about the event.

Band 3

131


=== Page 143 ===

Marks and results

Sample C (Test 3, Question 1)

Proposal

| am proposing that Artur Rubenstein, the Polish-born American pianist, should be
included in the ‘Great Achievers’ exhibition. | have chosen him because, as one of the
greatest and more beloved pianists in the world, he made a remarkable impact not
only on the world of music but also on the lives of his audiences.

Both his extraordinarily long career — from his teens to his late Os — and his
passionate, genuine love for music and for life distinguish him from the crowd of the
great musicians. As a pianist, he is renowned for his unique, magical touch and
inspirational power to move, and his perfect interpretation of the works of Chopin led
him to be considered the reincarnation of the great composer. As a person, he is
famous for his warm, infectious ‘joie de vivre’, his contributions to the careers of
yourg musicians, and his lively interest in the young state of Israel. When he died at
the age of 95, he was mourned for as ‘irreplacable’, both for his powers ag a pianist
and the happiness he brought to people from all over the world.

The exhibition should reflect his achievements by including a short biography,
photographs and posters of his concerts, and, if possible, a display of his famous
inspirational quotations, such as “| have found that if you love life, life will love you
back”. It should also be noted that he has not always been the legend he is now, and
despite his great talent and musical genius, he was not appreciated in his youth. It
was through the astonishing determination of practising seventeen hours a day
that he achieved such great success and made his music immortal. He has also left
an enormous amount of recordings, a sample of which, if possible, should be available
to listen to in the exhibition.

Another important part of his life was his contribution to the then newly created
state of Israel, which he visited many times and for which he played a great number
of charity concerts. Algo, the Artur Rubenstein Memorial Piano Competition exists
to this day, launching the careers of a new generation of pianists.

Comments

Content

All points fully covered and effectively integrated.

Range

Sophisticated and impressive use of a wide range of structures.

Appropriacy of register and format
Wholly appropriate.

Organisation and cohesion
Skilfully organised and coherent.

Accuracy
Minimal error.

Target reader
Impresses the reader — has a very positive effect.

Band §

132


=== Page 144 ===

Marks and results

Sample D (Test 3, Question 5a )

The Colour of Blood
By Brian Moore
A gripping political thriller

Brian Moore’s “The Colour of Blood” is a compelling and enigmatic tale of mystery and power in
which the hero, Cardinal Stephen Bem, tries to prevent an unnamed Eastern bloc country from
social unrest and martial law. There is a concordate between the church and the state and Bem
has successfully worked for the right to have church schools, to publish religious literature and to
worship freely. However, the concordate is jeopardized by right-wing Catholics who are dissatisfied
with Bem’s politice and try to incite the people to demonstrate against the government.

Bem is detained by right-wing activists, pretending to be Security Police members. One of the
best episodes in the book is when Bem manages to escape from his so-called “protective
custody” at a checkpoint installed by the army. Immediately before being stopped at the
checkpoint, Bem realizes that the alleged Security Policemen are imposters. He manages to get
out of the car, but he is then threatened by Colonel Foulnikov who aims a revolver at him. Poulnikov
has to hold his revolver in a way that only Bem can see it, but not the soldiers. Bem cannot speak
openly to the soldiers as he needs to be free to stop the right-wing Catholics. The suspense is
almost unbearable. Bem manages to escape from both parties and the reader wants to know how
this is going to end.

Another episode where the reading gets compulsive is the bishop's conference at Bem’s residence
in Lazienca Street. The right-wing leader Archbishop Krasnov put Bem's authority into question. He
reveals having been the writer of the leaflets which urge the people to demonstrate against the
government and he denies obeying Bem’s orders, Every reader knows that the events at the Rywald
ceremony on the following day will be crucial for the future of the country and at the bishop's meeting
the ground for a great showdown is prepared. No reader will be able to stop reading at that moment. |

Comments

Content

Excellent coverage of the task — two well-chosen events.
Range

Very good use of a wide range of structures and vocabulary.

Appropriacy of register and format
Wholly appropriate.

Organisation and cohesion
Good introduction — well structured.

Accuracy
Minimal error.

Target reader
Impresses the reader — has a very positive effect.

Band 5

133


=== Page 145 ===

Marks and results

Sample E (Test 4, Question 1)

Crisis, what crisis?

It is often suggested that humanity is facing an uncertain future and probably
global crisis. One of the main cauge of this situation is belleved to be the way we live,
as such a lifestyle is putting our environment into grave danger. However, it is my
opinion that we are actually exaggerating ag, frankly, our environment is much better
and cleaner that it was a century ago or even two centuries ago.

Lots of scientists argue that the waste that is thrown away seriously damages our
eco-system. Tons of rubbish gather in every corner available in the cities therefore
being a source of diseases and filthiness. But what they forget is that the situation
was even worse the past centuries and that today every country has taken various
mesures to minimise the effects. In addition, the number of people who support euch
mesures has been increasing every year.

Another threat to our environment that is often mentioned is the rate of
consumption of natural resources which will invariably lead to their disappearance. It
is true that every day we humans “goble up” tone of these resources by means of
transport (cars, buses, planes), production (factories), or even every day life
(heating etc.). On the other hand, however, other scientists have been trying to find
other kinds of resources to keep us into motion such as artificial ones like artificial
coal and petrol or natural sources of energy like the sun and wind. In fact some of
their researches have been put into practice succesfully.

Furthermore, the majority of poducts that are created are environment friendly as
they are made from natural resources. Thus they are biodegradable which means
that they can easily be absorbed by the ground without damaging the environment.

Allin all, | am cetain that our world is still in good condition and | really believe that
we should not panick at all with the warnings of some scientists.

Comments

Content
Valid arguments against the existence of a global crisis.

Range
Good and also ambitious.

Appropriacy of register and format
Appropriate.

Organisation and cohesion
Good.

Accuracy
Minor and unobtrusive errors.

Target reader
Positive effect on the reader.

Band 4
134


=== Page 146 ===

Marks and results

Paper 3 Use of English

One mark is given for each correct answer in questions 1-25.
Two marks are given for each correct answer in questions 26-31.
Up to two marks may be awarded for questions 32-39.

Two marks are given for each correct answer in questions 40-43.

Fourteen marks are available for question 44. Up to four marks may be awarded
for content (see test keys for content points) and ten for summary writing skills.
The ten marks for summary writing skills are divided into five bands using the
summary mark scheme below.

Outstanding realisation of the task set:
totally relevant

concise and totally coherent
skilfully organised, with effective use of linking devices

skilfully reworded, where appropriate

minimal non-impeding errors, probably due to ambition

Clearly informs and requires virtually no effort on the part of the reader.

Good realisation of the task set:

mostly relevant

concise and mostly coherent

well organised, with good use of linking devices
competently reworded, where appropriate

occasional non-impeding errors

Informs and requires minimal effort on the part of the reader.

eae
nN
ee eee

Satisfactory realisation of the task set:

generally relevant, with occasional digression

some attempt at concise writing and reasonably coherent

adequately organised, with some appropriate usc of linking devices
adequately reworded, where appropriate

some errors, mostly non-impeding

Adequately informs, though may require some effort on the part of the reader.

ww
mh

Inadequate attempt at the task set:
® some irrelevance
little attempt at concise writing, so likely to be over-length and incoherent in places OR
22 too short a. _ oo ;
24 some attempt at organisation, but only limited use of appropriate linking devices and may
. use inappropriate listing or note format
* inadequately reworded and/or inappropriate lifting
* a number of errors, which sometimes impede communication
Partially informs, though requires considerable effort on the part of the reader.

Poor attempt at the task set:
* considerable irrelevance
* no attempt at concise writing, so likely to be seriously over-length and seriously incoherent OR far too
short
— * poorl ised, with litt! f iate linking devices and/or relies on listi f
poorly organised, with little or no use of appropriate linking devices and/or relies on listing or note format
1.1 * poorly reworded and/or over-reliance on lifting
* numerous errors, which distract and impede communication
Fails to inform and requires excessive effort on the part of the reader.

Negligible or no attempt at the task set:

* does not demonstrate summary skills
incomprehensible due to serious error

totally irrelevant

insufficient language to assess (fewer than 10 words)
totally illegible

135


=== Page 147 ===

Marks and results

Paper 3 summary answers and examiner’s comments

The following pieces of writing have been selected from students’ answers. The
samples relate to question 44 in Tests 1-4. Explanatory notes have been added to
show how the bands have been arrived at. The comments should be read in
conjunction with the summary content points included in the Keys.

Sample A (Test 1)

The major problem is that any investigation into language origins has to confront is
the lack of records that could help us to bring some light to this unknown area. This
uncertainty leads to the creation of an enormous number of theories and more on the
speculation than on science.

Comments
Content points: (iii)

The summary does not quite cover point (iv), so, although the answer is generally
clear and shows effective rewording in places, only one summary point is covered

which limits the grade.

Content: 1 mark

Summary skills: Band 2

Sample B (Test 1)

It is difficult to investigate the origins of language and there are many Speculations
about it because, first of all, there are no archaeological records about spoken
language as ~ in contrast with other human activities — it does not have a legible
manifestation. The first written records on the issue appeared only long (around
45,000 years) after the birth of language. However, until recently language
investigation was not a fashionable target. Plenty of weird theories were rade up,
serious scholars avoided the question.

Comments
Content points: (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)

This is a good realisation of the task with skilful rewording in places, but
occasional errors and awkward linking in places limit it to a Band 4.

Content: 4 marks

Summary skills: Band 4
Sample C (Test 2)

The new stories are selected by three criteria. Firstly, according to the journalist’s
intuition about the impact which will have on its readers. Secondly, from the political,
financial, social and human importance of the event, and last but not least, the
journalist tries to understand if the news will cause excitement to its readers and
draw their attention.

136


=== Page 148 ===

Marks and results

Comments
Content points: (i), (ii), (iv)

The summary points are not always clearly made, but there is some attempt at
concise writing and the summary is reasonably coherent.

Content: 3 marks

Summary skills: Band 3

Sample D (Test 3)

Sound influences drivers in different ways. First of all, drivers feel secure when certain
gounds confirm their car is working properly. Secondly, sound can please drivers
because it fits with the car's image. Additionally, fast and pounding music can lead to

aggressive driving, speeding and risk taking. Lastly, loud music can prevent drivers from
thinking logically.

Comments
Content points: (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)

The summary is extremely concise, coherent, and strictly controlled. It informs
clearly, and requires very little effort from the reader.

Content: 4 marks

Summary skills: Band 5

Sample E (Test 4)

Brands according to the two texts play a significant role in our shopping habits, in our
work and even in our leisure activities. Brands are promoted as a set of values, they are
very important in our life. We use brands and we judge people from the brands they buy.
ln some cases, we see that if the employees love the brand they will work harder.
Furthermore, the goal is to turn every employee into a brand champion.

Comments
Content points: (ii), (iv)

The summary is generally relevant and there is an attempt at concise writing. This
is, however, offset by some lifting from the text rather than paraphrasing.

Content: 2 marks

Summary skills: Band 3

137


=== Page 149 ===

Marks and results

Paper 4 Listening

One mark is given for each correct answer. The total is weighted to give a mark out
of 40 for the paper. In Part 2 minor spelling errors are allowed, provided that the
candidate’s intention is clear.

For security reasons, several versions of the Listening paper are used at each
administration of the examination. Before grading, the performance of the
candidates in each of the versions is compared and marks adjusted to compensate
for any imbalance in levels of difficulty.

Paper5 Speaking

Assessment

Candidates are assessed on their own individual performance and not in relation to
each other, according to the following five analytical criteria: grammatical resource,
lexical resource, discourse management, pronunciation and interactive
communication. These criteria are interpreted at CPE level. Assessment is based on
performance in the whole test and is not related to particular parts of the test.

Both examiners assess the candidates. The assessor applies detailed, analytical
scales, and the interlocutor applies the global achievement scale, which is based on
the analytical scales.

Analytical scales
Grammatical resource

This refers to the accurate application of grammar rules and the effective
arrangement of words in utterances. At CPE level a wide range of grammatical
forms should be used appropriately and competently. Performance is viewed in
terms of the overall effectiveness of the language used.

Lexical resource

This refers to the candidate’s ability to use a wide and appropriate range of
vocabulary to meet task requirements. At CPE level the tasks require candidates to
express precise meanings, attitudes and opinions and to be able to convey abstract

ideas. Performance is viewed in terms of the overall effectiveness of the language
used.

Discourse management

This refers to the candidate’s ability to link utterances together to form coherent
monologue and contributions to dialogue. The utterances should be relevant to the
tasks and to preceding utterances in the discourse. The discourse produced should
be at a level of complexity appropriate to CPE level and the utterances should be
arranged logically to develop the themes or arguments required by the tasks. The
extent of contributions should be appropriate, i.e. long or short as required at a

particular point in the dynamic development of the discourse in order to achieve
the task.

138


=== Page 150 ===

Marks and results

Pronunciation

This refers to the candidate’s ability to produce easily comprehensible utterances to
fulfil the task requirements. At CPE level, acceptable pronunciation should be
achieved by the appropriate use of strong and weak syllables, the smooth linking of
words and the effective highlighting of information-bearing words. Intonation,
which includes the use of a sufficiently wide pitch range, should be used effectively
to convey meaning and articulation of individual] sounds should be sufficiently
clear for words to be understood. Examiners put themselves in the position of the
non-EFL specialist and assess the overall impact of the communication and the
degree of effort required to understand the candidate.

Interactive communication

This refers to the candidate’s ability to take an active part in the development of
the discourse, showing sensitivity to turn taking and without undue hesitation. It
requires the ability to participate competently in the range of interactive situations
in the test and to develop discussions on a range of topics by initiating and
responding appropriately. It also refers to the deployment of strategies to maintain
and repair interaction at an appropriate level throughout the test so that the tasks

can be fulfilled.

Global achievement scale

This scale refers to the candidate’s overall effectiveness in dealing with the tasks in
the three parts of the CPE Speaking Test.

Marks

Marks for each scale are awarded out of five and are subsequently weighted to
produce a final mark out of 40.

139


=== Page 151 ===

Test 1 Key

Paper 1 Reading (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)

1D 2B 3 C 4A 5 C 6B 7B 8 B
10 A 11 B 12 C 13 B 144A 15 D 16 B 17 B
18 A

Part 2 (two marks for each correct answer)
19 C 20 B 21 B 22 C 23 A 24 D 25 B 26 D

Part 3. (two marks for each correct answer)
27 F 28 E 29 H 30 A 31 G 32 D 33 C

Part 4 (two marks for each correct answer)
34 D 35 C 36 A 37 B 38 C 39 D 40 A

Paper 2 Writing (2 hours)
Task-specific mark schemes

Question 1: Sports Competitions

Content

Writer’s evaluation/opinion of the following three points on major international
sports competitions:

Major points for discussion:

® pursuit of excellence

® opportunities for television companies
® unequal/unfair competition

Further relevant points:
® cost of hosting such events
® investment opportunities for the host nation

Range

Language for evaluating, expressing and supporting opinions.
Appropriacy of register and format

Register consistently appropriate for essay for tutor.

Organisation and cohesion
Clear organisation of ideas with evaluation leading to conclusion.

Target reader

Would understand writer’s response to each of the points and conclusions about
the value of such events.

140


=== Page 152 ===

Test 1 Key

Question 2: Humans and Machines

Content

Description of the role of different machines.

Suggestions about possible dangers of dependence on machines.
Range

Language of description, explanation, evaluation and speculation.
Appropriacy of register and format

Register consistently appropriate for article in newspaper.

Organisation and cohesion
Clear organisation and development of ideas.

Target reader
Would understand the writer’s view of current situation and possible future effects.

Question 3: Concert Review

Content

Description of the concert and its music. Explanation of why the music was so
memorable (explanation may be implicit in description).

Range

Language of description, evaluation and explanation.

Appropriacy of register and format

Register consistently appropriate for music magazine.

Organisation and cohesion
Clearly organised.

Target reader

Would have a clear impression of the concert and its music and the writer’s
reaction to it.

Question 4: Holiday Resort

Content

Information about the hotel, restaurants and entertainment. Assessment of the
suitability of the resort for families.

Range

Language of description and evaluation.

Appropriacy of register and format
Register consistently appropriate for a report. Report format, possibly with
headings/subheadings.

Organisation and cohesion
Well-organised report with clear sections and appropriate conclusion.

Target reader
Would be fully informed about the resort and its suitability for families.

141


=== Page 153 ===

Test 1 Key

Question S(a): The Accidental Tourist

Content
Description of what is sad in the novel:
© the death of Ethan
® Sarah leaving Macon
® More minor events —
Macon’s accident
his distress over Edward
parts of Muriel’s life story
death of Dominick
Description of how humour is reflected in the characters and their actions:
© the accident - as a result of Macon’s household arrangements
® Macon’s panic attack — Charles trapped in the pantry
® Macon given the wrong crutches in the restaurant
® Macon’s attempts to organise his life
(Underlined points must be included. Bulleted points are suggested examples.)

Range
Language of description, narration and explanation.

Appropriacy of register and format
Register consistently appropriate for newspaper article.

Organisation and cohesion
Clearly organised ideas. Appropriate introduction and conclusion.

Target reader

Would have a clear idea of the sad events in the novel and would understand the
humorous way some events/characters are presented. Would understand the
writer’s reactions to these aspects of the book.

Question 5(b): The Colour of Blood

Content

Brief outline of Bem’s role at the start of the novel:

* co-operation with the regime — pragmatic approach to the events — reveals Bem’:
character

description of some of the events Bem is caught up in:

wife of murdered chauffeur — Bem’s concern

when kidnapped remains calm and clear-headed

during escape from college — resourceful

policeman in car, knife sharpener, Jop and his friends — ability to empathise

undertakes journey to see Urban

deals effectively with Urban

takes control once back at the Residence

at the church — quick thinking

Assessment of how far leadership qualities develop:

¢ at each turn of the plot, thinks first of others

¢ rises to the different demands made on him

(Underlined points must be included. Bulleted points are suggested examples.)

142


=== Page 154 ===

Test 1 Key

Range
Language of description, narration and evaluation.

Appropriacy of register and format
Register consistently appropriate for report for fellow members of book club.

Organisation and cobesion

Clear organisation of ideas, possibly with headings/subheadings. Appropriate
conclusion.

Target reader

Would have a clear idea of events in the novel and would understand the writer’s
assessment of Bem’s character / leadership qualities.

Question 5(c): The Go-Between

Content

Description of episodes involving Leo and Marian and those involving Leo and Ted

and analysis of the way each treats him and Leo’s response to it.
Leo and Marian:

® trip to Norwich to buy clothes

* arranges for Leo to miss boring lunch

® trip to London to buy bike

® plays on Leo’s sympathy — Ted going to war

Purpose behind these events and their effect:

¢ can meet Ted in Norwich

© if Leo misses lunch, he can deliver letter

® bike - will be green to suit Leo’s nature

® Leo succumbs — and delivers the last message

Leo and Ted:

® first encounter — Ted patronised by Dennis

* Leo hurts his knee - Ted is kind and sympathetic

¢ Ted makes clumsy attempts to explain grown-up behaviour to Leo
How Leo was treated by Marian and Ted:

® Marian — apparently totally selfish

® Ted — more hesitation about using Leo; shows more concern for him
(Underlined points must be included. Bulleted points are suggested examples.)

Range

Language of description, narration, analysis and evaluation.
Appropriacy of register and format

Register consistently appropriate for essay for tutor.

Organisation and cohesion
Clear organisation of ideas. Appropriate conclusion.

Target reader

Would have a clear idea of the ways Marian and Ted treated Leo. Would
understand the writer’s views about their treatment of him.

143


=== Page 155 ===

Test 1 Key

Paper 3 Use of English (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)

1 with 2 no 3 of 4 times 5 then/so 6 addition
7 which 8 to 9 when 10 there 11 by 12 its 13 did
14 what 15 fewer (NOT less)

Part 2 (one mark for each correct answer)

16 rhythmically 17 perception(s) 18 consciousness 19 (un)arguably
20 controversial 21 researchers 22 conviction 23 underestimated
(NOT overestimated) 24 decisive 25 coherent

Part 3 (two marks for each correct answer)

26 power 27 weak 28 position 29 illustrated 30 wings
31 round

Part 4 (one mark for each correct answer)

32 has (always) dedicated herself (1) + to her work/job in (1)

33 come up with (1) + a/the solution / an/the answer / (the/some)
answers/solutions (1)

34 to Henrik’s delight / to the delight of Henrik (1) + he was selected (1)
(correct use of apostrophe essential)

35 want to leave (1) + anything to chance (1)

36 purpose in (1) + calling a/the meeting was (1)

37 as/though it seems/appears (1) + the composer lacks any (1)

38 never occurred to me (1) + to ask (1)

39 how hard (1) +I tried (1)

NB: the mark scheme for Part 4 may be expanded with other appropriate answers.

Part S (questions 40-43 two marks for each correct answer)

40 {as) absurd claims mushroomed. No further additions.

41 (the) origin of language. Allow clear paraphrase, e.g. the beginnings of
language.

42 Explanation of ‘language is our medium’, e.g. language is essential to humans /
language is important to us / we use language (all the time) / language
differentiates humans from animals AND explanation of ‘how it evolved
remains . . . speculative’, e.g. we don’t know how it began / its origin. Both
essential for the mark.

43 Explanation of ‘linguistic competence’ e.g. ability to speak / using language /
development of language NOT just ‘communicate’ AND explanation of
‘capacity for (complex) thought’, e.g. ability to think / formulate ideas. NB:
both paraphrases essential for mark.

44 Award up to four marks for content. The paragraph should include the
following points:

i Written records are quite recent / only 5,000 years old (whereas speech is
at least 100,000 years old). ALLOW answers like ‘there are no written
records of the beginnings of language’.

144


=== Page 156 ===

Test 1 Key

ii Not regarded as a serious area of study / shunned by serious scholars.

iii Large numbers of (absurd/crazy/crackpot) theories AND/OR lack of
agreement/controversy {about origins of language).

iv No archaeological/physical/visible record/evidence of spoken language. Not
just ‘there are no records’.

Paper 4 Listening (40 minutes approximately)

Part1 (one mark for each correct answer)
1B 2C 3B 4A SA 6B 7A 8 B

Part 2 (one mark for each correct answer)

9 P/polar I/institute 10 population disturbance 11 stress (level(s)) /
level(s) of stress 12 false egg 13 capture/catch 14 (special) paint
15 fifteen/15 16 still 17 tour operators/companies/organisers

Part 3 (one mark for each correct answer)
18 B 19 C 20 A 21 A 22 D

Part 4 (one mark for each correct answer)
23 B 24 W 25 L 26 L 27 W 28 L

Transcript Cambridge Certificate of Proficiency in English Listening Test. Test 1.
I'm going to give you the instructions for this test.
Pl introduce each part of the test and give you time to look at the questions.
At the start of each piece you'll hear this sound:
tone
You'll hear each piece twice.
Remember, while you're listening, write your answers on the question paper.

You'll have five minutes at the end of the test to copy your answers onto the separate answer
sheet.

There will now be a pause. Please ask any questions now, because you must not speak
during the test.

[pause]
PART 1 Now open your question paper and look at Part One.

[pause]

You'll bear four different extracts. For questions 1 to 8, choose the answer (A, B or C)
which fits best according to what you hear. There are two questions for each extract.

Extract 1 [pause]

tone

145


=== Page 157 ===

Test 1 Key

Extract 2

Extract 3

146

Presenter:

Benetti:

The relationship of the media to climbing is quite interesting nowadays. It seems that
whenever you hear anything in the media about mountains, it’s usually tragic; it’s
usually cost the country thousands of dollars or pounds for a rescue or something. So
the general public’s perception about climbing is of a bunch of mad people who go
literally throwing themselves up and down mountains at the taxpayers’ expense.
Interestingly, journalists don’t write the same type of story about sports people getting
injured on the rugby or hockey pitch. Yet despite that, more and more people are getting
involved in dangerous sports like mountaineering and, | believe, this is because risk
has been largely taken out of our ordinary lives. There’s obviously something in the
human condition that does actually thrive in a different sort of atmosphere. Our
governments go out of their way to make everything we do safer and safer and more
and more regulated and, really, | think it’s empowering, that’s what it is, for people to
actually get that responsibility for their own lives back again.

[pause]
tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

[pause]
tone

A major worry for parents who come to see me is that, as their children progress
through school, they become experts on areas their parents know absolutely nothing
about! But in fact, it's essential for parents to realise that, in the course of daily
conversation with their offspring, they regularly pass on words of wisdom which are
crucial to a child’s understanding and acceptance of the norms of society, Parents often
say their youngsters take no notice of what they tell them, but our surveys of young
teenagers show that they have excellent recall of parental advice, and even, in most
cases, a quite surprising degree of respect for what we might call their elders and
betters.

Of course, the dreaded homework issue often rears its ugly head! To help or not to
help is the dilemma, and there’s no easy answer to this. Showing interest in a child’s
school work is one thing, but dictating answers is quite another. Allowing the child to
talk through a problem task is usually a constructive way of giving support, but one
should definitely draw the line at taking over.

[pause]

tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

[pause]

tone

Self-deception, like hope, springs eternal. Indeed, according to a recent article by the
Brazilian social scientist Ricardo Benetti, wherever there is human subjectivity, there
are people believing their own lies. For over 2000 years philosophers have remarked
upon this, but only in terms of moral opprobrium. Now Benetti is arguing for a more
sophisticated response to an endlessly sophisticated phenomenon. | rang him in Sao
Paulo, and asked him what he meant by self-deception.

It's particularly human. It’s related to language and to one part of the mind lying to or
manipulating the other part. Traditional logic cannot handle this type of situation. One
simple example — you're always late, so you advance your watch half an hour in order


=== Page 158 ===

Extract 4

PART 2

Interviewer:

Amanda Newark:

Test 1 Key

to be more punctual, OK? There's a tricky thing going on here, because if, every time
you look at your watch, you remember you changed it, it won’t work. So you’ve gat to
forget what you’ve done, in order for the self-deception to work. But then you can’t
remember to forget, because that’s a contradiction. You've got to forget you're forgetting
about it, and then it'll work!

[pause]

tone

[The recording is repeated. ]

[pause]

[pause]

tone

The increasingly meagre amount of airtime offered to classical music on television is a
clear indication of its increasing decline in stature. One recent television documentary
on the richness of the Renaissance period of cultural history suggested that music was
not really part of the overall picture, but a bit-part in the central drama starring the
visual arts and architecture. This is an assessment very much in keeping with our time.
But we musicians are also to blame. We assume a slow shot of some musicians in
dinner jackets ploughing through a 30-minute romantic piece of nonsense, or an
egghead lecturing in a dusty concert hall foyer, is enough to grab viewers. Patently, it
isn't. The need is very obviously for more programmes about music.

[pause]

tone

[The recording is repeated.]

[pause]

That’s the end of Part One.

Now turn to Part Two.

[pause]

You will hear part of a radio programme about penguins — birds which live in Antarctica.
For questions 9 to 17, complete the sentences with a word or short phrase.

You now have forty-five seconds in which to look at Part Two.
[pause]

tone

These days, even places as inaccessible as the Antarctic are becoming popular tourist
destinations. This evening we hear from Amanda Newark, who's been looking into how
this may be affecting the local wildlife.

My particular study project, carried out on behalf of the Polar Institute, has been looking
at penguins. Each year, around 7,000 tourists visit the Antarctic, and one of the things
it's possible for them to see at fairly close quarters are the penguins. And
conservationists have questioned whether this human presence might be having an
adverse effect on the birds. Although there’s no evidence that total penguin numbers
are declining in Antarctica, we have found some signs of what we call ‘population
disturbance’.

In our latest study, we set out to investigate penguins while they were nesting. In
particular, we wanted to see what effect the proximity of humans had on them. The way
that we decided to measure this was to take readings of the birds’ heart rate, when the
humans were there and when they weren't. Heart rate is a well-known indicator of
stress levels in birds as well as in people. The problem we had was how to do this

147


=== Page 159 ===

Test 1 Key

PART 3

148

without traumatising the penguins in the process and so increasing their heart rate
anyway.

What we had to do was place something close to the bird which would be accepted,
and the most obvious thing to try was a false egg, inside of which we could put an infra-
red sensor, very similar to that which sports people might use to measure their heart
rate. Fortunately, it's easy to get this into the nest. My experience was that, when |
approached, the penguin would take one or two steps off the nest, I'd just put the thing
in and go away, and then the penguin would get back onto its nest as if nothing had
happened. So for this experiment, you don't have to capture the bird, which is good.
Despite outward appearances, it might, of course, still have felt very threatened, but
that’s what we needed to measure. The very nice aspect to this project is that | was
working on a species where the parents swap incubation duty about every twenty-four
hours. So | marked the penguin very lightly on the breast, using special paint. This
meant that when | came back the next day and had an unmarked penguin sitting there,
| was measuring the heart rate of a bird which was completely unaware of my
experimental procedure. There was therefore no chance that its heart rate response to
humans could have been affected by anything I’d done.

This allowed me to do a number of experiments involving around ten groups of three
to five people and then a further series using twelve groups of over fifteen people. And
what | found is that with the small groups, there was no increase in the heartbeat when
the people were nearby. We can conclude, therefore, that they do not perceive such
groups as a threat. The larger groups are more likely to produce a response, but this
seems to be very heavily concentrated during the period when the penguins are being
approached. So if you have a large group of people moving towards nesting penguins,
during that time you do on occasion get very large heart rate increases. But once the
people keep still, even though they’re close by, then the penguin’s heart rate returns to
normal.

It's quite good news really, because we often hear about the human effects on the
environment, but as far as we can see, the tourists are not having any deleterious
effects on penguins. And, of course, it’s certainly possible for a tourist group visit to be
conducted so that it remains at a safe distance from the nesting penguins anyway. |
think the situation is quite positive in the Antarctic, because the tour operators
themselves have already shown very great commitment towards good behaviour and
towards minimising the effect their clients have while they're ashore.

[pause]

Now you'll hear Part Two again.
tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

That’s the end of Part Two.
Now turn to Part Three.

[pause]

You will hear the owner of a very unusual house and his architect talking to a visitor to the

house. For questions 18 to 22, choose the answer (A, B, C or D) which fits best according to
what you hear.

You now have one minute in which to look at Part Three.
[pause]

tone


=== Page 160 ===

Interviewer:

Owner:

Interviewer:
Owner:

Interviewer:

Architect:

Interviewer:

Owner:

Interviewer:
Architect:

Owner:

Architect:

Interviewer:
Architect:

Test 1 Key

This is an incredible place, this tall square tower which you've converted into a house.
What was it originally built as?

Well, in fact, as you can probably imagine from its shape, it was built as a sort of look-
out tower. | mean, it was built as a means of defence. Its position is perfect with the river
down there.

And why did you want to live in a tower house?

| think my idea was that having lived for so long in London, travelled a lot throughout
Britain, I’m often appalled at the standard of architecture from the middle of the twentieth
century, although | think it’s improving. | think there’s very little one sees where future
generations will look back on my generation and will say to themselves that we can see
things of great beauty. But | think that what Michael, my architect, has recreated here for
me is a very beautiful building.

So Michael, this must have been a dream-come-true project for you, something, |
mean, which, well, you must have been thinking about.

I’ve always been fascinated by ancient buildings, ever since | was a child, and what

we’ve got here is a vaulted kitchen and dining room, the great hall, a library above that
and five smallish bedrooms up top.

And it’s not as big as it actually looks from the outside?

No it’s not, it’s not large at all, but you're forever carting stuff from top to bottom and
vice versa, which can be exhausting sometimes.

Why does the wall sort of belly out a little bit there, at the bottom?

Well, the reason that happens, well, it’s really only in the last hundred years that we’ve
built what we call foundations. Before that, being good economically-minded folk, they
took any very big boulders which happened to be there, dug a very shallow trench, and
scooped the boulders into the trench, and of course, some of the big stones would be
above ground level and that’s what gives you this lovely soft junction between the wall
and the ground.

And as we look up, my wife insisted that these, er, windows — there’s 42 windows in the
tower here — that the windows were double-glazed. Well, obviously, Michael’s concern
was that the windows weren't double-glazed in the sixteenth century, and they wouldn’t
look terribly authentic.

Yeah, yeah. Because this is all authentic vaulting. Buildings like this always had vaulted
ground floors, this is the ... look ... the arch, makes it look like a dungeon but the
ground floor was vaulted, built with these arches, for two reasons: it made it very, very
strong and this is really where they held their stores. Eh, it was only latterly that we’ve
extended down and turned them into dining rooms and kitchens.

Yes, as you've done here. And how do you feel now the project's finished?

Well, | would hope in a hundred years’ or two hundred years’ time people who are either
living in here, or who come to visit the tower, er, might say, ‘How very nice, | wonder
who did this marvellous renovation in the twentieth century?’ Even if | have just altered
someone else's original design, | consider it my creation. We’ve given this building a
new lease of life. And who knows what purposes architects of the future may find for it?
But I’m sure it will stand for many years to come. It’s my place in history, so if someone
feels they want to leave something of some beauty behind, I'd say, ‘Go for it’

[pause]

Now you'll hear Part Three again.
tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause}

That's the end of Part Three.

149


=== Page 161 ===

Test 1 Key

PART 4

150

William:

Louisa:

William:

Louisa:

William:

Louisa:

William:

Louisa:

William:

Louisa:
William:

Louisa:

William:

Now turn to Part Four.
[pause]

You will hear part of a radio discussion between two people, Louisa and William, who have
been to a new modern art museum. For questions 23 to 28, decide whether the opinions are
expressed by only one of the speakers, or whether the speakers agree. Write L for Louisa, W
for William, or B for both, where they agree.

You now have thirty seconds in which to look at Part Four.
[pause]

tone

Now, we've both been to the new Northern Museum of Modern Art. So, what were your
impressions?

Well, it’s certainly a bizarre-looking building; it reminded me of a huge garden shed.
What did you think of the exhibitions themselves? | found the layout somewhat
confusing.

But maybe they haven't got their signs quite sorted out yet. It’s early days after all. |
must say | was surprised by the title of the main exhibition — ‘Wounds’. | thought art was
supposed to be all about healing nowadays.

Yes, but isn’t art about how things are? Surely contemporary art is often made, um,
usually made, at points of social, either social or personal friction, disruption and
anguish.

It says in the catalogue, ‘the best modern art cuts through the smooth but comforting
surface of traditional culture: it’s often disquieting, it makes its rules as it goes along’.
But | don’t think art should always shock, do you?

Hmm. But not all shocks are unpleasant, are they? For example, | heard a father say to
his children in the museum, ‘Come and see this. It’s the most realistic sculpture you'll
ever see!’

Oh, that must have been that living sculpture of seven girls standing at the entrance.
That was fascinating. Listening to some of the outraged comments like ‘That's not art!
How dare they put that there!’ made me think they’ve got a point.

It was certainly attracting an audience. People weren't sure if it was a sculpture or real
girls posing. It was interesting watching them trying to decide! | think there is a place for
this in an art gallery because that’s what it is. Anyway, even negative reactions are very
healthy. Art needs that sort of reaction to survive.

If it is art, then that’s true.

Something that occurred to me actually . . .| just wondered whether the exhibition is a
shade ostentatious.

There’s certainly a lot of spectacle in it, but there are some great pieces and a variety
of tempo. You can have your quieter moments like those flickering photographs of paper
arrows blowing in the air and the sounds to go with it — very relaxing. Art doesn’t have
to kind of grab you by the throat to be good, does it?

Well, | don’t Know about that. Anyway, we haven't discussed the regional exhibition yet.
| have to say I’m dubious about everyone’s obsession with regional characteristics, this
idea that in south west England, for example, there’s a different light which creates a
unique painting style...

[pause]

Now you'll hear Part Four again.
tone

{The recording is repeated.]
[pause]


=== Page 162 ===

Test 1 Key

That’s the end of Part Four,

There will now be a pause of five minutes for you to copy your answers onto the separate
answer sheet. Be sure to follow the numbering of all the questions.

Note: Stop/Pause the recording here and time five minutes. In the exam candidates will be
reminded when there is one minute remaining.

[pause]

That's the end of the test. Please stop now. Your supervisor will now collect all the question
papers and answer sheets,

151


=== Page 163 ===

Test 2 Key

Paper 1 Reading (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)

1B 2C 3 A 4A 5D 6C 7 C 8
10 D 11 B 12 C 13 D 14. C 15 A 16
18 A

Part 2 (two marks for each correct answer)
19 B 20 C 21 D 22 A 23 C 24 A 25 D 26 B

Part 3 (two marks for each correct answer)
27 G 28 E 29 F 30 A 31 H 32 B 33 D

Part 4 (two marks for each correct answer)
34 B 35 A 36 D 37 D 38 C 39 A 40 B

Paper 2. Writing (2 hours)
Task-specific mark schemes

Question 1: Town Redevelopment

Content
Writer’s evaluation of the advantages of each of the following suggestions:

© leisure centre
® hotel
© supermarket

Reasons for choice of one of these.

Range
Language of description, evaluation, comparison and justification.

Appropriacy of register and format
Proposal format, possibly with headings/subheadings.
Register consistent and appropriate for formal proposal.

Organisation and cohesion

Clear introduction — to state purpose of proposal.
Well-structured evaluation.

Clear conclusion/recommendation.

Target reader

Would understand writer’s opinion of each suggestion and the reasons for the
choice of one of them.

152


=== Page 164 ===

Test 2 Key

Question 2: Musical Memories

Content

Article must refer to a piece of music, describe the occasion remembered and the
importance of the occasion.

Range

Language of description, narration and explanation.
Appropriacy of register and format

Register consistently appropriate for magazine article.
Organisation and cohesion

Clearly organised.

Description/narration leading to explanation.

Target reader

Would understand the connection between the music and the occasion and
understand the writer’s feelings about the occasion.

Question 3: Festival Review

Content

Description of event and explanation of its significance.
Range

Language of description and explanation.

Appropriacy of register and format

Register consistently appropriate for a magazine review.
Organisation and cohesion

Clear organisation of ideas.

Description leading to explanation.

Target reader

Would understand what happens at the event and its local significance,

Question 4: Being Young

Content

Description of writer’s experiences of life as a young person or as an observer of
young people. Opinion on the headline and reasons for this view.

Range

Language of description, narration and explanation.

Appropriacy of register and format

Register consistently appropriate for letter to magazine.

Organisation and cohesion

Early reference to headline / reason for writing.

Clearly organised, moving from description to explanation and suitable conclusion.
Target reader

Would have a clear idea of the writer’s experiences and understand the writer’s
point of view.

153


=== Page 165 ===

Test 2 Key

Question S(a): The Accidental Tourist

Content

Description of Macon’s character revealed by:

® the types of books he writes

* his fondness for method in household arrangements

® his pleasure at being ‘unconnected’ when no one knows where he is
® the fact he reads the same book on every flight

An account of his misfortunes:
© Sarah leaving him

© his problems with Edward

© breaking his leg

@ his panic attack

An explanation about how events bring about change:

© Edward’s training — his observation of Muriel’s method and attitudes

® getting used to Muriel’s disorganised household

* his reliance on Sarah in Paris — the final realisation he needs to take control
(Underlined points must be included. Bulleted points are suggested examples.)

Range
Language of description, narration and explanation.

Appropriacy of register and format
Register consistently appropriate for review in an English-language newspaper.

Organisation and cohesion

Clear development of ideas, description leading to explanation and appropriate
conclusion.

Target reader

Would have a clear idea of Macon’s character, the change in him and the reasons
for this.

Question 5(b): The Colour of Blood

Content

Description of what happens in the church:

© when Bem arrives, Prisbek tries to give an incapacitating injection
Bem escapes into the body of the church

drama intensifies with the arrival of Urban

Archbishop tries to address the congregation

Bem gets to the microphone first

Bem makes his plea for restraint/peace

Bem shot

Bem’s feelings and the reasons for them:

¢ his aim has been achieved

© there will be no uprising

¢ church and state will continue to compromise

© joy that peace will be the end result

(Underlined points must be included. Bulleted points are suggested examples.)

154


=== Page 166 ===

Test 2 Key

Range
Language of description, narration and analysis.

Appropriacy of register and format
Register consistently appropriate for essay for tutor.
Organisation and cohesion

Clear organisation of ideas.
Account of events.

Target reader

Would understand what Cardinal Bem has been striving to achieve and his feelings
when his aims are realised.

Question S(c): The Go-Between

Content

Description of events that are influenced by the weather:

© Leo’s unsuitable clothes lead to Norwich trip

© heatwave — means there are picnics, swimming, Leo’s visits to the farm
® storm — on Leo’s birthday - carriage is sent for Marian

Explanation of how these contribute to the course of events:

® visit to Norwich — Marian meets Ted

® swimming trip to river - Leo meets Ted — becomes messenger

* storm — everything has built up to this climax: (for Leo, his birthday; for
Marian and Ted, discovery; for Ted, death)

(Underlined points must be included. Bulleted points are suggested examples.)

Range

Language of description, narration and analysis.
Appropriacy of register and format

Register consistently appropriate for newspaper article.
Organisation and cohesion

Clear organisation of ideas,

Description leading to analysis.

Target reader

Would understand the crucial events of the story and see how these were influenced
by the weather.

Paper 3 Use of English (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)

1 no 2 with 3 has 4 but 5 by 6 to
7 (al)though/while/whilst/whereas 8 as 9 goes 10 that
11 so 12 one 13 having 14 what 15 of

155


=== Page 167 ===

Test 2 Key

Part 2 (one mark for each correct answer)

16 conversant 17 depth 18 inclusion 19 increasingly
20 powerless 21 confidently 22 awareness 23 intricate
24 inability 25 unconnected

Part 3 (two marks for each correct answer)
26 process 27 meet 28 move 29 scene 30 hand 31 image

Part 4 (two marks for each correct answer)

32. in the light (1) + of (the) new (1)

33 a sharp rise/increase (1) + in the cost/price of (1)

34 waited for John to finish eating / his meal (1) + before (1)

35 yourself be/get (1) + taken in by (1)

36 (that) there is/are no dramatic (1) + change(s) in/to (1)

37 to come (1) + to terms with (1)

38 has (got ) no intention (1) + of (ever) visiting (1)

39 was led/given (1) + to believe (that) (1)

NB: the mark scheme for Part 4 may be expanded with other appropriate answers.

Part 5 (questions 40-43 two marks for each correct answer)

40 Paradox in line 1: the contrast between high tech (production of newspapers)
and there being nothing scientific about it (the way journalists operate, i.e. by
instinct). Both parts of paradox essential.

41 (And where space is tight) news from far away is always the loser. No further
additions.

42 (the) lies and trash (of which the tabloids are often accused) AND (a series of
[almost]) random reactions to random events. NOT artificial human invention.

43 Paragraph 3 sentence 1: paraphrase of ‘judgements’ AND ‘phrasing’ e.g.
content and style; comments and way he/she uses language.

44 Award up to four marks for content. The paragraph should include the
following points:

i Guided by feel/hunch/gut instinct/assumptions AND/OR Personal
experience/social status/personal beliefs.
ii News is about the exceptional AND/OR must interest/excite/entertain the
reader.
iii What fits/space is tight.
iv Political/social/economic/human significance.

Paper 4 Listening (40 minutes approximately)

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)
1C 2B 3B 4c 5 Cc GA 7C 8A

156


=== Page 168 ===

Test 2 Key

Part 2 (one mark for each correct answer)

9 (highly) stressful / (high) stress 10 logical

11 computer screen / computer

12 (an) identity parade(s) / (a) line(-)up(s) / (an) ID parade(s)

13 race / (skin) colour / colour (skin) / race and colour 14 (self}(-)confidence
15 long(-)term 16 source/origin 17 language

Part 3 (one mark for each correct answer)
18 C 19 B 20 A 21 A 22 B

Part 4 (one mark for each correct answer)
23 B 24 C 25 B 26 B 27 C 28 A

Transcript Cambridge Certificate of Proficiency in English Listening Test. Test 2.
I'm going to give you the instructions for this test.
Pll introduce each part of the test and give you time to look at the questions.
At the start of each piece you'll bear this sound:
tone
You'll hear each piece twice.
Remember, while you're listening, write your answers on the question paper.

You'll have five minutes at the end of the test to copy your answers onto the separate answer
sheet.

There will now be a pause. Please ask any questions now, because you must not speak
during the test.

[pause]

PART 1 Now open your question paper and look at Part One.
[pause]

You'll hear four different extracts. For questions 1 to 8, choose the answer (A, B or C)
which fits best according to what you hear. There are two questions for each extract.

Extract 1 [pause]

tone

Well, in the late twentieth century, tourists became the aristocrats of the new world
order. They were pampered and protected wherever they went: they were treated with
deference. The holiday companies tried to tailor the holiday experience to their clients’
expectations, creating sort of safe havens for tourists, rather than tailoring their
expectations to suit the country they were visiting — to what the host country could
really provide. And so, when something happened which allowed them to get a glimpse
of the real life of the country, they were unprepared and it tended to be an unpleasant
experience; it pricked the bubble in which the tourist was travelling and they went back
home even more convinced that everything foreign is dangerous.

It's a sad fact were you to have done a quick poll at any airport in western Europe,
Say, in the 1980s, and you had asked tourists what they knew of the country they'd just
been to, you wouldn’t have got very far.


=== Page 169 ===

Test 2 Key

Extract 2

Extract 3

Extract 4

158

Sue:

Pete:

Sue:

Pete:

|pause]
tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

[pause]

tone

In the sixteenth century, a huge and intricate map of London was created. The map-
makers climbed various church towers — London was awash with churches at that time
— and sketched out what they could see from the top of each one. If you like, it’s a
patchwork of triangles, with things omitted, buildings being moved round. For instance,
you'll always see the handsome facade of the buildings. Obviously, if you’d been totally
truthful, you’d have seen a lot of boring backyards. It’s essentially a bird’s-eye view of
London, with the perspectives played around with, so while it appears that you're
looking at a map, you're actually looking at a plan of the town with buildings cleverly
juxtaposed on top of it.

Nobody seriously bought this map to get from A to B. What they really wanted was a
view of a powerful city which they were associated with. And it’s because of that, that
whoever produced it was prepared to invest an awful lot to have it done, and anyone
who acquired it had to pay a lot for the privilege.

[pause]

tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

[pause]

tone

Well, you must admit that thirties films about Egyptian mummies are regarded as ripe
nonsense even by the standards of Hollywood horror films. | think it’s amazing that
they’ve brought out a new version. | wasn’t convinced. What about you, Pete?

Well, | saw the original and the bare bones of the plot are very close to that, but in style
it's different — they’ve gone for the action/adventure and comedy feel and they fall
between all these stools, really.

Um, | found the characters one-dimensional and the gags when they’re there, and
they’re there all the time, really don’t work.

That's the main flaw with it. You have this thing now that the hero has to be a wise-
cracking hero. | think this is very much a film made by design and committee where the
good guy always has to have a line to deliver when something happens. As a result, all
tension is undercut and any potential horror evaporates — you’re just dulled.

[pause]

tone

[The recording is repeated.]

[pause]

[pause]

tone

Until recently, the operas of the eighteenth-century composer Handel were considered

to be rather tedious, with tortuous plots and a static dramatic presentation. Yet there
was almost a reverential attitude to them because it was felt that what you were doing


=== Page 170 ===

Test 2 Key

by staging one was recreating the past through a kind of musical archaeology.
Everything in these operas revolves around the rigid musical convention in which a
singer stands on stage without moving and sings a long solo aria with built-in
repetitions and embellishments designed to show her virtuosity. But one of the great
discoveries we've made recently, through inventive stage directors and a new breed of
singers, is that, for all the contrivance and formality of Handel's operas, there is an
incredible resource of passion, and somehow it is stronger for the fact that it is
presented to you, the audience, in a very controlled way. You feel these emotions ... um
. forcing the conventions, you know, testing them, pushing them to extremes. You feel
the conventions are about to burst with the weight of this emotional outpouring. And it’s
one of the most exciting qualities in Handel’s work.

[pause]

tone

[The recording is repeated.]

[pause]

That’s the end of Part One.

Now turn to Part Two.

[pause]

You will hear part of a radio programme about the difficulties faced by witnesses and by the
police after a crime has been committed. For questions 9 to 17, complete the sentences with
a word or short phrase.

You now have forty-five seconds in which to look at Part Two.
[pause]
tone

When a crime’s been committed, the police often call on the general public for help.
They need witnesses; they depend on the witness's eyes and ears to help track down
the culprit. Acting as a witness calls for an accurate memory of events which have
generally happened very quickly and under highly stressful circumstances. Not
surprisingly, eye-witness memory has become a study for psychologists like myself.

I've been, first of all, evaluating the new systems used by the police to help
witnesses reconstruct the face of the suspect. This new system has taken into account
how we recognise facial features. The old system, photofit, where you had to piece
together the eyes and then the mouth etc. of the suspect, was developed from a logical,
rather than a psychological, analysis. It rather assumed people could look at isolated
features and pick out an appropriate pair of eyes and so on. But in fact, people tend to
remember faces as wholes, rather than a collection of features. So now we allow
witnesses to work with a complete face on a computer screen and they can swap
features in and out and make a much more accurate judgement about the degree of
resemblance, in context. But what we don’t know at the end of the day is whether
witnesses are able to make more recognisable likenesses than they used to.

Another way for the police to ask for the help of witnesses is by using identity
parades. This is where the police line up similar-looking people for the witnesses to
identify the possible suspect. Unfortunately, one in five picks out someone who acts as
a foil, someone known to be innocent.

One thing that has been researched over the last ten years is how the witness's race
compared with the suspect’s, how they match up — white people are better able to
discriminate amongst other white people, for example. So this is something which is a
major factor in trying to identify which witnesses are going to be the best at recalling
these things. Another major factor which influences our accuracy is the amount of time

159


=== Page 171 ===

Test 2 Key

PART 3

160

Interviewer:

Diana:

Interviewer:

Diana:

which has passed since an event took place. And a lot of the indicators that people may
think are good, like the confidence that a witness feels, is not actually as good a clue to
their accuracy as we would hope. You often get these people saying, ‘Yes, that’s the one
who did it. I’m positive of it’ But the person identified is not the suspect.

And another important question is, do older adults differ from younger ones in their
memory for events? We know a lot about how older adults perform in conventional
experiments where we might give them lists of words to remember or whatever. And we
know that older adults are poorer at long-term memory than they are at short-term
memory. We also know they tend to be poor at things like, did they read it or did they
see it? Did Mr X tell them this fact or Mr Y? In other words that is, making decisions
about the source of the memory.

So how have we gone about exploring these questions?

We show people a controlled event using videos depicting crimes and then after
some delay we ask them a series of questions about the event. Unfortunately, it’s too
soon to be able to come to any firm conclusions.

And we've also done research which shows that the language an older adult uses is
different from that of a younger adult. Most policemen are quite young, and many
witnesses and victims of crime are quite old, and maybe the older adult’s memory is not
being fully used because of the communication problems.

So we're very much hoping that the results of our research make an impact on police
procedure ...

[pause]

Now you'll bear Part Two again.
tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

That's the end of Part Two.
Now turn to Part Three.

[pause]

You will hear a radio interview with Diana Boardman, the manager of an orchestra. For
questions 18 to 22, choose the answer (A, B, C or D) which fits best according to what you
bear.

You now have one minute in which to look at Part Three.

[pause]

tone

I'm delighted to have with me today Diana Boardman, Manager of the Starlight
Symphony Orchestra which is playing here in London at the moment. Diana, there are
a lot of symphony orchestras, aren’t there?

Yes, there are a number of orchestras around the country, but the Starlight Symphony
Orchestra has its home in London and is traditionally an orchestra that plays
contemporary music.

I notice on the programme that you play some of the popular classics like Tchaikovsky,
but there’s also a very high proportion of world premieres — new commissions like Tim
Cartwright, Mark Westerman.

Yes, that’s right. | think that’s really what makes the orchestra exceptional amongst
many orchestras. As | said, the orchestra has always had new writers very much at the
heart — it’s what the players are most skilled in and if you look back over the
orchestra’s history and the people it’s been associated with, it’s always been in that
area of music.


=== Page 172 ===

Interviewer:
Diana:

Interviewer:
Diana:

Interviewer:
Diana:

Interviewer:
Diana:

Interviewer:

Diana:

Interviewer:

Diana:

Interviewer:

ART 4

Test 2 Key

We also know though that modern music is the least well attended in the concert
programme ...

Yes.

So is it a policy to sort of slip them in between better-known pieces ... ?

That’s the way we do it. | mean, I think there are only two ways you can programme
contemporary music — you can either do that or you can go all out and programme an
entire evening of contemporary music and make that an event in itself but there's a high
risk to it.

Now there’s a new piece by Julie Turnbull — one of the very few women composers
represented.

That’s right.
Do you think we’re seeing a new trend for women artists?
It’s certainly there ...| mean | don’t think you can single out classical music as a

particular case — it’s there across all the art forms in many different ways. | think it’s a
question of where we take things from here. We can’t change what's happened in the
past but it's a question of where we go from here.

It's an extraordinary fact, though, that there are more men in the audiences of classical
music than there are women. Why do you suppose that is?

Certainly if you compare it to the ballet or the theatre worlds, that is the case. | think it’s
just because men have traditionally been more involved and so they're more attracted
to it. | mean it’s only in the last sort of five, ten years perhaps that if you go into an
orchestral concert, you do see a good number of women on the stage.

{ think that’s particularly true of your orchestra. So, how did you come into arts
administration?

Just by accident, really. | started working in Australia when | left university. | wanted to
find a job that was interesting and challenging and | was lucky enough to be employed
by the City of Sydney Eisteddfod, which is a three-week festival of competitions taken
very seriously by the people that enter it, and at that time it wasn’t necessarily a career
in arts administration that I'd thought about. Most of my colleagues were trying to be
merchant bankers or computer operators ... erm, but | kept on with it and I’ve ended up
where | am now.

Now you're going to be responsible for an educational initiative by the BBC, what’s
that?

[pause]

Now you'll hear Part Three again.
tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

That’s the end of Part Three.
Now turn to Part Four.

{pause]

You will hear Colin Beattie, the presenter of a radio arts programme, talking to Annie
Watson, a critic, about anew TV drama series which stars an actor called Richard Garrard.
For questions 23 to 28, decide whether the opinions are expressed by only one of the
speakers, or whether the speakers agree. Write A for Annie, C for Colin, or B for both,
where they agree.

You now have thirty seconds in which to look at Part Four.
[pause]
tone

141


=== Page 173 ===

Test 2 Key

162

Colin:

Annie:

Colin:

Annie:
Colin:
Annie:
Colin:
Annie:
Colin:
Annie:
Colin:

Annie:
Colin:

Annie:

With me today | have the critic Annie Watson, and we'll be discussing a new TV drama
called Man of Stone. The lead character is played by the actor Richard Garrard, whose
face is best known to us from television drama and film, usually in the menacing
supporting role, which he does beautifully.

Mm...a role he has off to perfection, although this latest series does twist the
typecasting slightly to have him as a loveable rogue.

A detective, called Jake incidentally, with a heart of gold . . . not particularly original.
Episode one starts in action-packed London, but the camera soon focuses on Cardiff,
which | thought set this series a little above the formulaic drama series about the
eccentric professional with a complicated personal life.

Umm ...1 think the fact it’s filmed there is very refreshing because there are so many
series set in other UK cities.

Now, Annie, you've seen the first two episodes. The first ten minutes of the first episode
is completely different from the rest, it’s absolutely full of action, isn’t it?

Well, | think that’s a concession to the people who need an exciting bit to use for
publicity purposes — and in this case it certainly seems to pay off.

It's that that makes you tune in to the first episode.

But it certainly calms down a bit in episode two, though. In fact, the first episode just
sets the scene. It was unnecessary to explain in such boring detail the machinations of
Garrard’s character, Jake, not wanting to move but having to anyway.

But the way it established Jake's relationship with his daughter was very touching.

A bit on the sugary side, | thought. But with everyone else he seems to show nothing
but contempt.

That's a little harsh, isn’t it?

Maybe. But getting back to the series, you must agree it’s really slow and perfunctory.
Come now, it’s old-fashioned in that way and that’s what | liked about it, because it’s
not, in the way that so many TV series are at the moment, cut very quickly with music
thrown in. The camera lingers and there’s great composition.

| don’t really think it deserves such a eulogy but I’m sure it'll get...

[pause]

Now you'll hear Part Four again.
tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

That's the end of Part Four.

There will now be a pause of five minutes for you to copy your answers onto the separate
answer sheet. Be sure to follow the numbering of all the questions.

Note: Stop/Pause the recording here and time five minutes. In the exam candidates will be
reminded when there is one minute remaining.

[pause]

That’s the end of the test. Please stop now. Your supervisor will now collect all the question
papers and answer sheets.


=== Page 174 ===

Test 3 Key

Paper 1 Reading (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)

1D 2A 3B 4B 5 D 6A 7C 8
10 A 11 B 12 A 13 D 14. A 15 C 16
18 C

Part 2. (two marks for each correct answer)
19 B 20 D 21.C 22 B 23 A 24D 25 D 26 C

Part 3 (two marks for each correct answer)
27 E 28 A 29H 30 C 31 G 32 D 33 B

Part 4 (two marks for each correct answer)
34 B 35 C 36 D 37 A 38 A 39 C 40 B

Paper 2. Writing (2 hours)
Task-specific mark schemes

Question 1: Great Achievers

Content

Proposal must:

® name and justify choice of person

© describe aspects of person’s life to be included

¢ explain how exhibition can reflect person’s achievements

Range
Language for justifying, describing and/or narrating, suggesting and explaining.

Appropriacy of register and format
Register consistently appropriate for proposal for college members.
NB may be directed at college Principal or fellow students.

Organisation and cohesion
Clear organisation of ideas, possibly with headings.
Appropriate introduction and conclusion.

Target reader
Would understand why the person has been suggested and how his/her
achievements could best be reflected in the exhibition.

163


=== Page 175 ===

Test 3 Key

Question 2: Wedding Celebrations

Content
Article must describe a typical wedding and explain why such weddings are so
memorable. NB: explanation may well be covered in the description.

Range

Language of description, explanation — may also include evaluation.
Appropriacy of register and format

Register consistently appropriate for article in magazine.

Organisation and cohesion
Clear organisation and development of ideas.

Target reader

Would understand how weddings are celebrated, and writer’s view of their special
and memorable quality.

Question 3: Film Review

Content

Review must identify and describe a particular film and explain reasons for its
continuing popularity.

Range

Language of description/narration, evaluation and explanation.

Appropriacy of register and format

Register consistently appropriate for general interest magazine.

Organisation and cohesion

Clearly organised, moving from description/narration to evaluation/explanation.

Target reader

Would have a clear impression of the film and understand writer’s reason for
thinking it will remain successful.

Question 4: Town Library

Content

Letter should attempt to explain under-use of library and suggest ways to attract
readers by improvements/innovations.

Range
Language for explaining/hypothesising and suggesting.

Appropriacy of register and format
Register consistently appropriate for a letter to newspaper.

Organisation and cohesion
Appropriate opening and closing sentences — clear organisation of ideas.

Target reader
Would understand writer’s explanation and suggestions.

164


=== Page 176 ===

Question S(a): The Colour of Blood

Content

Description of two episodes which build suspense and maintain interest:

the events in the agricultural college

the ride in the police car

the hospital mecting with Jan Ley

the meeting with trade unionists

the final scene in the cathedral

Explanation of how suspense is conveyed in these episodes.

(Underlined points must be included. Bulleted points are suggested examples.)

Range

Language of description, narration, explanation and evaluation.
Appropriacy of register and format

Register consistently appropriate for review in student magazine.
Organisation and cohesion

Clearly organised ideas.
Appropriate introduction and conclusion.

Target reader

Would understand what happened during these episodes, how the suspense was
built up and interest maintained.

Question 5(b): The Go-Between

Content

Analysis of cricket match and description of aspects of it illustrating social divide:
® possible reference to other episodes in the novel illustrating social divide
Assessment of how far quotation is true.

(Underlined points must be included. Bulleted point may be included.)

Range

Language of description, narration, assessment.

Appropriacy of register and format

Register consistently appropriate for essay for cutor.
Organisation and cohesion

Clear organisation of ideas.

Appropriate conclusion.

Target reader

Would have a clear idea of the social background to the story and would
understand the writer’s assessment of it.

Question 5(c): Things Fall Apart

Content

Description of how life is governed by beliefs and customs of the clan:

social organisation within the village determines:
© family life ~ wives in separate huts

© differentiated tasks / farming for men and women

Test 3 Key

165


=== Page 177 ===

Test 3 Key

customs include:

@ the week of peace — to ensure good harvest

¢ Feast of the New Yam

© betrothal ceremonies

© funeral rites

beliefs include:

e abhorrence of the unnatural — twins abandoned
© Okonkwo’s father cannot be buried

¢ Okonkwo’s body cannot be touched

ideas of justice:

© account for Okonkwo’s exile

© Ikemefuna’s presence in the village and his death
(Underlined points must be included. Bulleted points are suggested examples.)

Range
Language of description, narration, explanation and recommendation.

Appropriacy of register and format
Register consistently appropriate for report for reading group — headings would be
acceptable.

Organisation and cohesion
Clear organisation of ideas.
Appropriate opening and conclusion.

Target reader

Would have a clear idea of some of the customs and beliefs of the clan,
understand how these govern the lives of the people of Umuofia and be able to
decide whether this was a suitable book for the reading group.

Paper 3 Use of English (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)

1 put 2 what 3 become 4 make 5 there
6 although/though/while/whilst 7 up 8 those 9 on 10 as
11 one 12 view 13 irrespective/regardless 14 such 15 a

Part 2 (one mark for each correct answer)

16 characteristic 17 recognisable/recognizable 18 unceremoniously
19 independent 20 extraordinary 21 rigidity 22 zealous
23 conservative 24 surrounding 25 increasingly

Part 3 (two marks for each correct answer)
26 fail 27 short 28 turn 29 account 30 blocked 31 deal

Part 4 (one mark for each correct answer)

32 Selena know/realise/suspect (1) + how difficult/hard it will be to (1)
33 made an immediate/instant (1) + impression on/upon (1)

166


=== Page 178 ===

Test 3 Key

34 put me (1) + at (my) ease with (1)

35 was no vegetation (1) + whatsoever (growing) in (1)

36 no circumstances (1) + will/shall we ever do business (1)

37 came to (1) + the conclusion (that) (1)

38 was in no mood / wasn’t / was not in the/a/any mood (1) + for going out / to go
out (1)

39 was taken aback (1) + by the news of the (1)

NB: the mark scheme for Part 4 may be expanded with other appropriate answers.

Part 5 (questions 40-43 two marks for each correct answer)

40 Modern cars are (so) quiet that the writer/he is aware of the noise (of the tyres)
AND the noise of tyre rumble is more noticeable.

Both ideas required for the mark.

41 Explanation of the idea of ‘subjectively’ e.g. individuals respond differently to
car noise. Different from / contrasting with explanation of scientific
measurement e.g. whereas scientists will produce one objective
result/measurement. Clear explanation of both parts of this contrast required.

42 Dismay (allow In dismay). No other additions other than a lead-in, e.g. The

word is... . No alternatives.
43 Rousing. No additions other than a lead-in, e.g. The word is... . No
alternatives.

44 Award up to four marks for content. The paragraph should include the
following points:
i (A majority of) drivers like noise evidence that car systems are working / in
good order.
ii (Most) drivers like engine noise AND/OR Car drivers like an engine noise
which matches their expectations of the car.

iii (Loud/fast) music can lead drivers to drive badly AND/OR Rousing rock
music can make drivers aggressive.
iv Loud music reduces the ability of drivers to think clearly.

Paper 4 Listening (40 minutes approximately)

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)
1B 2C 3.C 4A 5 Cc 6A 7A 8 B

Part 2 (one mark for each correct answer)

9 artist(s) and writer(s) (in either order)

10 conservationists / the conservationist 11 (the) water(-)plants
12 energy/energies 13. m/March 14 agriculture/farming

15 (very) uneven 16 w/Wildlife t/Trust

17 p/Plan of a/Action (for the hare)

Part 3 (one mark for each correct answer)
18 D 19 C 20 C 21 C 22 B

167


=== Page 179 ===

Test 3 Key

Part 4 (one mark for each correct answer)
23 F 24M 25 8B 26 M 27 F 28 B

Transcript Cambridge Certificate of Proficiency in English Listening Test. Test 3.
I'm going to give you the instructions for this test.
Pll introduce each part of the test and give you time to look at the questions.
At the start of each piece you'll bear this sound:

tone
You'll hear each piece twice.
Remember, while you're listening, write your answers on the question paper.

You'll have five minutes at the end of the test to copy your answers onto the separate answer
sheet,

There will now be a pause. Please ask any questions now, because you must not speak
during the test.

[pause]

PART 1 Now open your question paper and look at Part One.
[pause]

You'll hear four different extracts. For questions 1 to 8, choose the answer (A, B or C)
which fits best according to what you bear. There are two questions for each extract.

Extract 1 [pause]

tone

Presenter: First on the programme today, we'll discuss the consultation document the UK airport
authorities have just brought out, as part of their forward planning for the next thirty
years. Of course, thirty years from now, we might be exploring the option of shuttle
flights to Mars, but that’s by-the-by. This document is concerned with more mundane, in
fact, strictly down-to-earth considerations — delays, cancellations, lost baggage,
congestion, the potential development of the air-freight sector, the integration of
airports with the surface transportation infrastructure — hardly fly-me-to-the-moon stuff!
But above all, its headline target is to give the travelling public a better deal. | asked the
transport minister, Helen Fraser, to comment.

Helen: We have to strike a balance. The government certainly won't be committing itself to
providing massive resources. Even if we can see the number of passengers is going to
double, we can’t necessarily double the number of runways, and the public will have to
accept that. People are very keen to fly, but nobody's too keen to have a runway near
them. So we have to talk about it thoroughly, and this document’s a useful step in the
consultative process.

[pause]
tone
[The recording is repeated.
[pause]
Extract 2 [pause]

tone

168


=== Page 180 ===

Woman:

Man:

Woman:

Man:

Test 3 Key

My husband forgot my birthday this year, and he minded more than | did! I’m afraid
that’s what happens when you get to my age — birthdays lose their resonance and
you're lucky if they're acknowledged at all. Some people would say you're luckier if they
go unacknowledged, but | wouldn't go that far. But there again, it's more important that
he remembers the kids’ birthdays, isn’t it? Be that as it may, in the event, he could see
that | was a bit put out, because there is a residual excitement there, there’s no getting
away from it. It's nothing to do with getting older, although when | was nine or ten that
was all-important . . . to think | used to long for the day when I'd be married with kids .. .
No, what I feel now is more a little thrill, bred of nostalgia for the old excitement | used
to feel, you know, about the attention, the presents and being more grown up; notching
up another year towards adulthood.

{pause]

tone

[The recording is repeated.]

[pause]

[pause]

tone

Frankly | don’t see why, just because a museum is for science and technology and not
ancient artefacts and paintings, that means it's got to go down-market and have all
these interactive exhibits, you know, pushing buttons and flashing lights.

It stands to reason that they are pitched at a younger audience — school parties, kids
with parents etc. and I’m afraid it’s just no longer the case that kids will wander around
in awe looking at a lot of old engine exhibits in glass boxes or drawers full of nuts and
bolts. They won’t put up with it, and if the numbers don’t come in through the doors,
then the museum is answerable — which is just what happened in Belton.

But that means, as usual, we're pandering to the lowest common denominator. Quoting
examples of failed museums is not enough. More thorough investigation needs to be
done. How do we know that customers won't like a few more traditional exhibits? | know
my kids do and | don’t think they're exceptional.

That'll mean more money going into research, instead of into the museums themselves.
[pause]

tone

[The recording is repeated.]

[pause]

[pause]

tone

This is an extremely witty book, written in a racy Style. It moves along at a great pace,
the descriptions are crisp, the action dramatic. In fact, I’ve only got one reservation, but
| fear it's an insurmountable one, because this is in fact an historical novel, dealing with
the lite and experiences of Mary Queen of Scots — so we're going back four centuries.
And apart fram inventing dialogue between people who were not actually
contemporaries, the writer has peppered the story with anachronisms so gross as to be
almost a source of entertainment in themselves. | found myself half expecting a bicycle
or train to appear amongst the carts and carriages at any moment. And | wish | could
believe that she was writing a spoof, but sadly this is not the case. And this is the
aspect of the book which will spoil it for the intelligent reader. Although, if you can
suspend disbelief for a bit, in favour of an evening of pure escapism, it’s actually a jolly
good read, for all its shortcomings.

169


=== Page 181 ===

Test 3 Key

PART 2

170

[pause]

tone

[The recording is repeated. ]
[pause]

That’s the end of Part One.
Now turn to Part Two.
[pause]

You will bear part of a radio talk about a small mammal called the brown hare. For
questions 9 to 17, complete the sentences with a word or short phrase.

You now have forty-five seconds in which to look at Part Two.
[pause]

tone

The long-legged, long-eared brown hare, which looks like a taller cousin of the common
rabbit, is an enigmatic creature. Shrouded in mystery and steeped in folklore, it attracts a
wide range of admirers. To writers and artists, it’s an endless source of inspiration; to
hunters it’s a challenging game animal as it dashes for cover across the winter fields.
And, more practically, to some farmers it's an annoying pest. And although it’s still familiar
on farmland in many parts of Britain, conservationists are starting to detect a worrying
problem because in recent years the brown hare hasn’t been thriving and the population
is in decline.

What’s more, this doesn’t seem to be particularly connected with habitat. Hares are
often to be found beside ditches where water plants provide plenty of cover during the
day. At night, because they like to be where they can see danger coming, they make
their way to open ground. Their main predators are foxes, but adult hares can easily
outrun them. If a fox comes into a field where hares are, they won’t pay much attention
to it until it gets within about fifty metres. At that point, the hare stands on its hind legs
and looks directly at the fox. This is actually a signal which says to the fox, ‘I’ve seen
you so there’s no point in chasing me. It’s a behaviour known as ‘pursuit deterrence’,
and it’s one that’s beneficial to both animals because they don’t waste the energy which
would be expended in a fruitless chase.

The fox and the hare often turn up in folklore, where hares are often associated with
madness. This may stem from the fact that hares are basically nocturnal animals.
People used to look out over open fields on clear moonlit nights and see hares
behaving strangely. In the breeding season, which lasts from January to July, they may
be seen chasing each other across fields and engaging in what look like boxing
matches. In Britain at least, hares are traditionally thought to ‘go mad’ in March, but this
is simply the time of the year when they're most evident to the casual observer. The
nights are getting shorter, so they’re forced out more during the hours of daylight, whilst
the crops in the fields have not yet grown to a height where they conceal the hare’s
activities.

So what is happening to this familiar creature? Some surveys, carried out in the
1990s, tried to determine trends in the hare population. In recent years, there’ve been
many changes in agriculture that should have benefited hares. Fields have become
larger, for example, whilst field crops have often replaced livestock farming. Both trends
produce just the sort of habitat which hares seek out. But the population was in fact
found to have declined by around ten per cent over five years. Thanks to the surveys,
there now exists a clear picture of the national distribution of hares and it’s very uneven.
Hare numbers have long been susceptible to annual fluctuation but, even taking this
into account, a pattern emerges; a few isolated pockets with reasonable numbers of
animals are interspersed with quite large areas with very few or none at all.


=== Page 182 ===

PART 3

Interviewer:

Ann Howard:

Interviewer:
Ann Howard:
Interviewer:
Ann Howard:

Interviewer:
Ann Howard:

Interviewer:
Ann Howard:

Interviewer:

Test 3 Key

In response to these findings, a number of schemes are being established and run
by the Wildlife Trust. These are designed to show that game animals, wildlife and
farming can co-exist quite happily. In the areas covered by the schemes, vegetation is
allowed to grow high in certain places with more banks and ditches designed to provide
protection for hares. With careful and judicious management, it should be possible to
increase hare numbers quite dramatically and quickly within a limited area. The long-
term conservation goal, however, is to achieve reasonable numbers of hares across the
whole country. A Plan of Action for the hare was published in 1995. It has a highly
ambitious target for the hare’s recovery to ensure that the population recoups its
decline by 2010. Thus we hope that in the future...

[pause]

Now you'll hear Part Two again.
tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

That’s the end of Part Two.
Now turn to Part Three.

[pause]

You will bear an interview with a British film director, Ann Howard, who has recently made
a film in Hollywood. For questions 18 to 22, choose the answer (A, B, C or D) which fits
best according to what you bear.

You now have one minute in which to look at Part Three.

{pause]

tone

With us today in the studio is the film director, Ann Howard. Ann, your early success
gave you the opportunity to travel to the USA to work in Hollywood. Would you say you
have a good relationship with the American film business?

Oh, everybody has a tough relationship with the American film industry, you know.
Hollywood's got this ability to love the success of the films you’ve done independently
and then want to destroy that very fact, really; to buy you and then to make you into
something very different.

Their studio system did little for the one film you made over there, did it?

Yeah, it was a bit messed up. | had a bit of trouble there.

It's a Shame because you can see the original concept has an awful lot going for it.
Yeah, but | shouldn't really be allowed to make a comedy. It’s not in my temperament,
really! | can’t even tell a joke! So there were a lot of factors at work in all that.

There were several script writers involved, weren’t there?

Yes, quite a few. | mean, | wrote the script and there were American characters in it, so
when | showed it to the studio, they said, ‘Well, let’s define these American characters
more clearly. Let's build up the American sequences’ and all that kind of thing. ‘So let’s
work with this writer and that writer’ and in the end there were three or four of us
working on it and it got a bit confusing.

And the ship sort of sails away at that point, doesn’t it?

Right, it does. Yeah. But you’ve still got to direct the film, you know. And you've got to
deal with everything. And it was quite an interesting experience. | still got a lot out of
directing it, you know. And then we cut the movie together and | went through the
experience of previews, which | hadn’t been through before.

Now, this is where they put it to test audiences, don’t they?

171


=== Page 183 ===

Test 3 Key

Ann Howard:

Interviewer:
Ann Howard:

Interviewer:
Ann Howard:

interviewer:
Ann Howard:

Interviewer:

Ann Howard:

Interviewer:
Ann Howard:

Interviewer:
Ann Howard:

PART 4

172

Interviewer:

Yeah, they do it very scientifically, actually. And the answers are always the same. It’s
amazing. You preview it in Los Angeles and they say, ‘Let’s try New York to see if we
get different responses’, then they’re exactly the same in New York as in Los
Angeles.

But surely that audience knows they’re watching it under very strange circumstances?
Yeah, too right, you’ve got a bunch of self-appointed critics because generally you don’t
look at a film and fill out a card. First of all, you should choose to see a movie. When
you pay for the ticket, you’ve accepted some level of involvement with the film.

It’s like a contract, isn’t it?

Yeah, but when you go to a test audience showing, you haven't done that. You're going
to be a kind of privileged person.

And these people can cause changes to occur?

Well, yeah. They can do. They have approval ratings. Then they have to say if they will
recommend it to their friends. And so you have to get definitely or probably on that,
combined with excellent or very good on 75~80% of the cards, and if not they put you
back in the mincer and grind you up ready to spit you out again.

It makes you wonder what would have happened to the great classics if they'd had to
go through that, doesn’t it?

Well, they always did it, even Chaplin used to preview his films, you Know. | mean, it’s a
useful tool as long as it’s in the hands of the film maker. If you direct a movie, you want
to know about points that maybe don’t reach an audience and you realise that very
quickly if you show it to two or three hundred people.

But then you're still relying on your own judgement ultimately, aren’t you?

Yeah. It's when it’s used as a marketing tool or as a tool to make the films accessible to
the blandest, most middle-of-the-road audience that you get problems.

Yeah. You get movies that all look like American television.

Yeah, they all look the same, don’t they? It’s America, when you go there...

[pause]

Now you'll hear Part Three again.
tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

That's the end of Part Three.
Now turn to Part Four.

[pause]

You will hear part of a radio discussion in which two friends, Frieda and Martin, are being
interviewed about tidiness. For questions 23 to 28, decide whether the opinions are
expressed by only one of the speakers, or whether the speakers agree. Write F for Frieda, M
for Martin, or B for both, where they agree.

You now have thirty seconds in which to look at Part Four,

[pause]

tone

This week in our series ‘Obsessions’ we're going to talk about tidiness. With me are
Frieda Keele and Martin Robinson. Frieda, why do you think that some of us have full
control over our possessions and are disciplined about what we have and where we

keep everything, while others live in a constant muddle of things we can’t bear to put
away, let alone throw away?


=== Page 184 ===

Frieda:

Martin:

Frieda:
Martin:
Frieda:
Martin:
Frieda:

Martin:
Frieda:

Martin:

Frieda:
Martin:
Frieda:
Martin:

Frieda:

Martin:

Frieda:
Martin:

Frieda:

Martin:

Frieda:
Martin:
Frieda:

Martin:
Frieda:

Martin:
Frieda:
Interviewer:

Test 3 Key

For me tidiness is something I've always been used to. I've never even thought about it.
My mother was incredibly houseproud and | guess | just learnt it from her. If your
parents lived in a muddle then | suppose you will too.

My parents didn’t live in a mess, but my room was my own. Thank goodness, my
mother just accepted there were certain things | just had to have. They were part of me.
Didr’t you have your treasures, Frieda?

Oh, yes, there were five-minute wonders, but they were always tidy, and every so often
Vd throw some out when they weren't useful any more.

Oh no. | treasured things for ten or fifteen years.

So they served some purpose, did they?

Oh no, | never used them, | just kept them in my bedroom all that time, a bit like a
squirrel, you know...

But what happened to them, where are they now, these things that were such an
important part of your life?

| bet if | looked, they'd all be in a box somewhere in the attic in my mum’s house.

My mother would’ve thrown them out, because she chucked everything out, everything
that wasn’t useful to her .. . 1 thought all mothers do this, you know .. . in the bin!

That must have been a nightmare! No, my mum just . . . let me muddle along.
Occasionally she’d say, ‘Martin, | want to clean your room tomorrow, so will you clear it
a bit?’ She was great like that. Never any hassle. That’s why I’m such a laid-back
person, | think.

And maybe why I'm so stressed.

Don't you think that tidiness is not a constant, it’s in the eye of the beholder?

| don’t quite see what you mean, sorry?

| mean the room | work in at home now, it’s appallingly untidy. There are layers of .. .
paper and everything all over the floor. But that’s the way | like to work.

Now, that amazes me because | would have assumed that you were ... the kind of . ..
person like myself... I’ve an office where ...1 work from home ... and | simply can’t
get down to work unless . . . everything is exactly where it ought to be. The desk has to
be clear and...

Oh look, you've even done a sort of diagram of how you’re going to organise the day . .
. that gives me the shivers. It’s so orderly!

But I have to be orderly.

But | find that if | start tidying up, then | don’t do any work at all because .. . tidying up is
infinite . . . there’s no end to it.

But that’s not so. Anyway, it’s fantastic that feeling, when you've got .. . everything
straight.

... And then you feel you've done a day’s work, and so you don’t do anything . . .
constructive. Tidying is endlessly preparing the ground for some great work ... but you
risk never doing the great work! It’s an illusion the tidying, just get on . . . with the job in
hand, | say.

Oh no, I couldn’t . .. because for me it’s not a displacement activity . . .

A what?

You know, I’m not putting off anything by tidying up, it’s just part of ... routine... and
here | am look .. .|’m called the scruffy one.

Wearing old jeans.

And there's you in a collar and tie and everything ... and yet you've got the untidy
room.

Just goes to show, doesn't it?

Umm.

And that’s where we have to leave it today. Frieda, Martin, thank you.

[pause]

173


=== Page 185 ===

Test 3 Key

Now you'll bear Part Four again,
tone

[The recording is repeated. ]
{pause]

That's the end of Part Four.

There will now be a pause of five minutes for you to copy your answers onto the separate
answer sheet. Be sure to follow the numbering of all the questions.

Note: Stop/Pause the recording here and time five minutes. In the exam candidates will be
reminded when there is one minute remaining.

[pause]

That's the end of the test. Please stop now. Your supervisor will now collect all the question
papers and answer sheets.

174


=== Page 186 ===

Test 4 Key

Paper 1 Reading (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part1 (one mark for each correct answer)

1C 2B 3 A 4B 5D 6C 7C 8 B
10 D 11 B 12 C 13 A 14 D 15 B 16 C 17 D
18 C

Part 2 (two marks for each correct answer)
19 B 20 A 21 D 22 B 23 D 24 C 25 A 26 C

Part 3 (two marks for each correct answer)
27 C 28 G 29 B 30 E 31 H 32 A 33 F

Part 4 (two marks for each correct answer)
34 8B 35 B 36 D 37 B 38 A 39 C 40 D

Paper 2. Writing (2 hours)
Task-specific mark schemes

Question 1: Environment

Content
Article should discuss whether environmental crisis exists and how serious it is.

Major points for discussion:

© that our way of life is damaging the environment

® that natural resources are disappearing

© the possibility that lifestyle and attitudes can be changed

Range

Language for explaining, presenting/developing an argument, evaluating — may
include hypothesising.

Appropriacy of register and format

Register consistently appropriate for magazine article.
Organisation and cohesion

Clear development of argument.

Appropriate introduction and conclusion.

Target reader

Would understand writer’s views on the seriousness or otherwise of the
environmental crisis.

175


=== Page 187 ===

Test 4 Key

Question 2: Personal Possessions

Content

Letter should describe the object and explain why the writer wants to keep it
forever.

Range

Language of description and explanation.

Appropriacy of register and format

Register consistently appropriate for letter to magazine.

Organisation and cohesion

Clearly organised.

Suitable opening and concluding sentences.

Target reader

Would know what the object is like and understand its significance for the writer.

Question 3: Old Building

Content

Proposal should suggest two uses for the building and explain how these will
improve life for young people.

Range

Language of recommendation, explanation and description.
Appropriacy of register and format

Register consistently appropriate for a proposal to the council.
Organisation and cohesion

Clear organisation, possibly with headings.

Target reader

Would understand the suggestions put forward and the benefits they would offer to
young people.

Question 4: It All Worked Out Well

Content

Article should describe a difficult situation and explain how it resulted in a positive
experience.

Range

Language of description, narration, explanation and evaluation.

Appropriacy of register and format

Register consistently appropriate for magazine article.

Organisation and cohesion

Early reference to reason for writing.

Clearly organised, moving from narration to explanation and suitable conclusion.

Target reader

Would understand the writer’s experience, how the situation developed and its
significance.

176


=== Page 188 ===

Test 4 Key

Question S(a): The Colour of Blood

Content

Description of how Bem behaves in three locations and what this reveals about his
character,

Suggested locations:

¢ agricultural college

fields/countryside outside college
church (flower arranger)

railway station

in the police car

outside the church (leaflet distribution)
in the hospital with Jan Ley

in Jop’s house

in Mallinek Palace (PM’s quarters)
final scene in Cathedral

(Underlined points must be included. Bulleted points are suggested examples.)

Range
Language of description, narration and explanation.

Appropriacy of register and format
Register consistently appropriate for essay for tutor.

Organisation and cohesion

Clear development of ideas, description leading to explanation and appropriate
conclusion.

Target reader

Would understand how Bem behaved and how his character was revealed in three
episodes/locations.

Question 5(b): The Go-Between

Content

Explanation of how Leo relates to adults:

® fits into role as child in the household

* total confusion in the situation involving Marian and Ted
Description of adult world and values:

@ organisation of the household

* picnics, tennis and swimming parties

¢ Lord T’s values and beliefs

¢ Marian - selfish disregard for Leo’s feelings

© Ted — honest, practical, bleak outlook on life

(Underlined points must be included. Bulleted points are suggested examples.)

Range
Language of description, narration and analysis.

Appropriacy of register and format
Register consistently appropriate for review in a local newspaper.

177


=== Page 189 ===

Test 4 Key

Organisation and cohesion
Clear organisation of ideas.

Target reader
Would understand Leo’s relationship with adults at Brandham Hall.

Question S(c): Things Fall Apart
Content

Description of different cultures represented by Okonkwo and his people and the
missionaries and colonial governors:
People of Umuofia

© beliefs

® customs

© code of behaviour

Missionaries and governors

¢ establish trading post

© bring education

¢ bring new religion which appeals e.g. to Nwoye

® establish new laws and courts

Assessment of extent to which the two learn to understand each other:

¢ Okonkwo refuses to change, or try to understand

© others, e.g. Obierika, say there is no point in resisting

* some, like Nwoye, are converted and see good in what the missionaries are
doing

attitude of the Commissioner — an anthropological study

understanding attitude of some missionaries (Mr Brown)

intolerance of others (Mr Smith)

villagers taken prisoner when they expected to have discussions

court officials beat and insult prisoners

(Underlined points must be included. Bulleted points are suggested examples.)

Range
Language of description, narration and assessment.

Appropriacy of register and format

Register consistently appropriate for report for librarian — may have headings.
Organisation and cohesion

Clear organisation of ideas.

Description leading to assessment.

Target reader
Would understand something of the two cultures, would be able to assess the

extent to which the people learn to understand each other and be able to decide if
this was a suitable book for the exhibition.

178


=== Page 190 ===

Test 4 Key

Paper 3 Use of English (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)

la 2 in 3 each 4 its 5 what 6 their 7 how
8 however/nevertheless 9 less 10 so 11 like 12 next
13 carry 14 to 15 into

Part 2 (one mark for each correct answer)

16 accessible (NOT accessed) 17 leisurely 18 unforgettable

19 breath(-)taking 20 mountaineer(s) 21 erosion 22 challenging
23 imperceptibly 24 diversity/biodiversity (NOT diversification)

25 splendour/splendor

Part 3 (two marks for each correct answer)

26 report 27 board 28 natural 29 appearance 30 set
31 hot

Part 4 (one mark for each correct answer)

32 it not (1) + been for (1)

33 did with her money (1) + was no concern (1)

34 was on the point (1) + of leaving (the office) (1)

35 sooner had I got (1) + in(to) my car than (1)

36 took (absolutely) no (1) + notice (what(so)ever) of (1)

37 not the first time (1) + (that) Sally has run (1)

38 better known (1) + as a writer (of books) (1)

39 has been brought (1) + to my attention (1)

NB: the mark scheme for Part 4 may be expanded with other appropriate answers.

Part 5 (questions 40-43 two marks for each correct answer)

40 It shows the fact that brands are all around us / they dominate our lives OR it
echoes the word landscape, NOT answers like ‘There are so many brands in
today’s markets.’

41 (The verb is) decode. No further additions from the text unless ‘decode’ is
highlighted.

42 Their work (in a call centre) / handling/dealing with (confused, demanding,
anxious) Customers NOT answers which refer to patience only

43 In the past the focus was on the relationship between the producer and the
customer whereas now importance is placed on promoting the brand to
employees. BOTH past and present reference essential.

44 Award up to four marks for content. The paragraph should include the
following points:

i Brands generate trust / sense of security / represent certainty / consistency

of quality.
ii Brands provide us with criteria / a set of values /a way by which we judge
others.

179


=== Page 191 ===

Test 4 Key

iii Producers want to appear morally and socially responsible / people to
ignore how goods are produced / people to identify with their philosophy.

iv Brands motivate employees to work hard / inspire employees with affection
and loyalty.

Paper 4 Listening (40 minutes approximately)

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)
1 C 2A 3A 4C 5B 6 C 7B 8A

Part 2 (one mark for each correct answer)

9 feathers / (striking) plumage

10 (very) yellow-green / yellow (and) green (in either order but NOT yellow or
green) 11 surface 12 diet/food/feeding 13 nesting

14 adult (population of) 15 soft(er) / a soft(er) call

16 (body) warmth/heat (NOT vigilance)

17 ill{-)health / poor health / bad health

Part 3 (one mark for each correct answer)
18 D 19 B 20 B 21 A 22 D

Part 4 (one mark for each correct answer)
23 B 24 W 25S 26 S 27 B 28 B

Transcript Cambridge Certificate of Proficiency in English Listening Test. Test 4.
P’m going to give you the instructions for this test.
Tl introduce each part of the test and give you time to look at the questions.
At the start of each piece you'll bear this sound:
tone
You'll hear each piece twice.
Remember, while you're listening, write your answers on the question paper.
You'll have five minutes at the end of the test to copy your answers onto the separate answer
sheet.
There will now be a pause. Please ask any questions now, because you must not speak
during the test.

[pause]

PART 1 Now open your question paper and look at Part One.
[pause]

You'll bear four different extracts. For questions 1 to 8, choose the answer (A, B or C)
which fits best according to what you hear. There are two questions for each extract.

180


=== Page 192 ===

Extract 1

Interviewer:

Jim:

Interviewer:

Jim:

Interviewer:
Jim:

Extract 2

Extract 3

Presenter:
lan:

Test 4 Key

[pause]
tone

Do you think it’s true that science fiction writing is still seen as being outside the literary
mainstream?

Yes, and | think that’s because literary critics on the whole are educated to think of
literature as being — um — an interplay between characters, and science fiction isn't like
that! It concerns humans struggling against something unknown, something that has to
be grasped. And then personally what attracted me to it when | came back after an
extended period travelling right away from ordinary society was that | saw it as the
literature of outsiders.

At the start of the new millennium, so many people have said that all the predictions in
science fiction films of the last fifty years were all completely wrong. Do you think they
were?

I'm not sure that it’s about prediction. For some writers it may be but — er — for me it's a
kind of mythology. To take an example, the idea of a machine that’s programmed to
think of itself as human is in itself touching, even tragic.

A bit like something out of classical myth as well?

It is, yes.

[pause]

tone

{The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

[pause]
tone

The domestic cat has been part of everyday life in Europe for many hundreds of years.
In fact, the first signs of a domestic cat in Britain come from an archaeological site
dating from the Iron Age, the period that lasted from about 500 B.C. to the time of the
Roman invasion in 55 B.C.

Another interesting thing is whether domestic cats were deliberately acquired the
way farm animals were, or whether they just came along of their own accord and were
tolerated by humans. | suspect the latter, in which case we could find their remains from
a much earlier period.

The search for evidence to pin down the exact date of the domestic cat’s arrival in
Britain is made no easier by the fact that our own native wild cats, which were fairly
widespread across the country, were likely to interbreed with domestic cats that had left
their homes and become strays. As a result, one of the problems we always have is
deciding whether a particular isolated bone is of a domestic cat or a local wild cat —
there's very little difference between them.

[pause]

tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

[pause]

tone

So what’s the state of photojournalism today, lan?
Well, in my view there are some remarkably high-calibre people out there and some
promising young ones learning the ropes, but in many cases it will have to be a labour

181


=== Page 193 ===

Test 4 Key

Presenter:
lan:

Presenter:
lan:

Extract 4

PART 2

182

Interviewer:

of love, since markets for exciting independent work are much thinner on the ground
and that seems to be a well-established trend, and not just a temporary ‘blip’.

So why is it so problematic? There presumably was a time when photojournalists could
more or less pick the publication where they ‘placed’ their work?

| think there’s the globalisation of the market and there’s been a shift in editorial
attitudes.

Why, what's changed?

Well, | think one of the aspects is it's very hard to find a story now that hasn’t been
covered to death already. Wherever there’s news or worthwhile pictures you're going to
find four or five different types of media trying to get to it. And the public have access to
everything and their attention span’s very short, so editors daren’t print an in-depth
analysis with a series of well-chosen images even two days after a world event.

[pause]

tone

[The recording is repeated.]

[pause]
[pause]
tone

With a new concert hall, you start with a basic shape that must accommodate anything
from a guitar solo to a full 80-piece orchestra. To get that flexibility, you have to be able
to change the acoustic conditions accordingly. We use several different methods to
achieve this, such as soft panels that slide in and out of the room from slots in the
ceiling; or maybe very large sound deflectors hanging above the stage; and you can
actually increase or decrease the effective size of the room itself by putting in a series
of gates or valves in the side walls which can be opened or closed. All this can make a
real difference to the acoustics of the hall, but at a high cost.

When re-thinking an old concert hall, there are a lot of very low cost and relatively
simple things that can be done to improve the sound quality when the basic shape
cannot be altered. You can always simply move the aisle carpet or change the seats.
And sometimes stripping off the layers of thin wood and old plaster to reveal the solid
wall behind also helps, producing a significant improvement in orchestral sound quality.
[pause]
tone
[The recording is repeated.]

[pause]

That's the end of Part One.
Now turn to Part Two.
[pause]

You will hear part of a radio programme about wildlife in which a researcher, Kevin Nelson,
talks about a type of duck called the mallard, which he has been studying. For questions 9
to 17, complete the sentences with a word or short phrase.

You now have forty-five seconds in which to look at Part Two.

[pause]

tone

Ducks are present in just about every country in the world and are widely recognised as
a result. Researcher Kevin Nelson has been looking at one type of duck in particular,
the mallard. And he has made some very interesting discoveries. On a recent visit to
London, he told us about them.


=== Page 194 ===

Kevin:

Interviewer:

Test 4 Key

It came as a bombshell to me. I'd spent years banging my head against a brick wall
trying to figure out just what it was about the male mallard duck that the female found
attractive. When | started out, | imagined it must be some aspect of the feathers
because the male has very striking plumage, in contrast to the female. But this proved
not to be the case. So | started looking at other things, such as size, behaviour, etc. But
what became clear was that the thing females were actually paying attention to was the
coloration of the male duck’s mouthparts, what's known as the bill.

| realised that the more attractive males have flawless bills, very yellow-green, no
blemishes, whilst others have more grey-green bills, often with little black spots on. And
the bill is very important. The mallard uses it as a filter because this is not a diving
duck, it doesn't catch fish or find things on the bottom of the rivers and lakes where it
lives, it rather dabbles on the surface, the bill filtering out the plant and animal matter it
depends on. And the key to all this is that the coloration of the bill can change on a
much shorter time-scale than the feathers. The feathers that the duck grows in the
autumn will stay with it through to the following June, but as the duck’s diet changes, so
does the colour of its bill. So by keeping an eye on that, the female can spot the best
fed duck to be the father of her ducklings.

So | then asked myself, ‘In that case, why is it that the male and female ducks have
such different colouring?’ And it seems actually that it’s the female's brown
inconspicuous plumage that is easier to explain. And that explanation lies in the fact
that the female is particularly vulnerable to predators when she’s nesting. The nest,
which is often built up a waterside tree, is constructed using a combination of leaves
and grass, and the female stays there for up to twenty-three days, during which time
she is very vulnerable, despite the camouflage. So much so, actually, that an imbalance
in the population results. At hatching, there’s an equal number of male and female
chicks, but in the adult population you often see what's called ‘a pair and a spare’, three
ducks which go around together and the spare is often an extra male.

This also goes some way to explaining the male duck’s relative silence. It’s the
female who makes the characteristic quacking sound as she keeps in touch with her
chicks and warns of danger. The male has a softer call, rarely heard unless he is
excited or alarmed.

The ducklings themselves are fairly independent, however, and can swim and feed
themselves twelve hours after hatching. But within the first week or so of life, they lack
the ability to generate their own body heat and so rely on the female duck for warmth.
That's why you'll often see the ducklings clustered around the mother, and she can
keep up to about fifteen with her in that way. One thing that interested me though, was
the fact that you often see very large numbers of ducklings under the protection of one
female. And this is because there’s an interesting, and not uncommon, phenomenon
amongst mallards. What happens is offspring are often abandoned by mothers who are
in ill-health and these mothers may actually be making a wise decision. Because other
mothers, better able to provide protection from predators, are quite happy to adopt
ducklings which are not their own. You see, in this species, the mother can do this at
very little extra cost, as these ducklings can feed themselves. After that initial first week,
the female only has to provide vigilance for the whole group, regardless of its size. |
once saw a mother with a group of sixty ducklings — it's a wonderful sight.

Kevin Nelson there, talking about the mallard duck.

[pause]

Now you'll hear Part Two again.
tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

That’s the end of Part Two.

183


=== Page 195 ===

Test 4 Key

PART 3

184

Heather:

Brundy:

Heather:

Brundy:

Heather:

Brundy:

Heather:

Brundy:

Heather:
Brundy:

Heather:
Brundy:

Heather:

Now turn to Part Three.

[pause]

You will hear an interview with Roland Brundy, the new chairman of the television channel

GTV. For questions 18 to 22, choose the answer (A, B, C or D) which fits best according to
what you hear.

You now have one minute in which to look at Part Three.
[pause]

tone

The appointment of Roland Brundy as chairman of GTV has been widely welcomed. |
spoke to him earlier this week. Roland, ten years is a relatively long time in the life of a
television channel. What trends do you think are going to have an impact on GTV
during your reign as chairman?

Well | think one of the most obvious is technology — the advent of digital radio and
television and of course the increase in the number of channels in Britain. And all that is
closely linked to competition; more channels means more choice for the consumer.
Whom do you regard as the competition?

Everybody. The other channels, independent radio companies, satellite. It’s by no
means all bad, it forces GTV to sharpen up its act and with all the extra activity, it
increases the pool of talent and ideas available, so competition isn’t, er, a one-way
street if you like.

So how do you think the competition should be tackled? Is it a case of trying to do the
same thing except more or better or should you compete by offering something
different — or should you do both?

| don’t think you can cover all angles. | think either you say you're going to take the
competition head on and here’s where we're going to find the resources to do it, this is
where we're going to match the exponentially rising costs of sporting events, say, and
films. Or you say we're not going to take them head on; we don’t have the resources to
do it, so we'll do something different.

You’ve mentioned sport and films — is that because they're areas where you're losing
viewers to other channels or...

Acquiring sporting events and movies is actually easy. You just write a bigger cheque
than anyone else's. But it’s not so easy to have the sort of standing you want in the
arts — in drama — even if it’s mainstream stuff, er, or something like current affairs.
They require creativity, a corpus of people, a history — it all takes time, you can’t just
buy it.

So, how you react to competition can be a difficult decision to make.

It can put you in a very invidious position. On the one hand, of course, you can do
nothing and then people turn around and say look at fuddy duddy old GTV, they haven't
even noticed what’s going on in the market — they haven't changed anything. But if you
do change or adapt you can get accused of copying — but who’s copying whom?

Do you have a world view on technological change?

A world view? Beware of broadcasters with world views! No, no | don't. | think you have
to take note of what’s happening ~ all the time — but restrain any fears you may have
that it's all going to happen tomorrow as we're led to believe. !’m dubious about the
pace of technological change and the way it affects broadcasters and viewers and I've
learnt through the experience of the last ten years that technology doesn't drive this
industry — in the end it serves it.

What do you think the main differences are between running a television channel and
running any other type of business?


=== Page 196 ===

Brundy:

PART 4

Presenter:

Sonia:
William:

Sonia:

William:

Sonia:

William:

Sonia:
Presenter:

William:

Sonia:

seer 1 ancy

Well, the first that springs to mind always is how you gauge your achievement. It's much
less precise in this field — not less important but much harder to quantify. GTV has
actually done some quite sensible things in trying to ascertain such things but where
that hasn’t been possible it’s tried to identify the objectives it's aiming to achieve. | think
the other difference is that GTV is a more important place than anywhere I’ve worked. It
touches every aspect of life in this country. | mean without being too pompous, it’s far
more significant than the printing business, or a weekend commercial television
company.

[pause]

Now you'll bear Part Three again.

tone

[The recording is repeated.]

[pause]

That’s the end of Part Three.

Now turn to Part Four.

[pause]

You will hear part of a radio discussion in which two actors, William: and Sonia, talk about
their profession. For questions 23 to 28, decide whether the opinions are expressed by only
one of the speakers, or whether the speakers agree. Write W for William, S for Sonia, or B
for both, where they agree.

You now have thirty seconds in which to look at Part Four.
[pause]

tone

Welcome to ‘Artscene’. With me today are the stage and film actors Sonia Neville and
William Brady. I'd like to begin by asking you both what you do before rehearsals start.
Do you read the whole script, or look just at your lines within the script, or focus on the
main speeches within your lines, or what? Sonia?

Well, some directors want you to know your lines by the time you get to the rehearsal
stage.

Well, it is important to have read the script carefully, but | always work on the person
before the words...

Uh-huh, the character, the source of the speeches ...

So | do extensive research and compare myself to the character. | see what | have that
fits him and what | don’t have. | find it quite a hard process and...

Oh, | think one of the most important things about preparation for a part is to relax...
Lucky you! But you're not going to be acting by yourself — you’re playing with somebody
— So you can never know what you might have to respond to...

But that’s exactly what creates quality performances — if you all get it right!

And, once you've arrived at a way of playing a character, do you stick with that or do
you keep changing it as you keep performing the role? William?

Mmm ...1 find so much depends on the audience, the energy you get out there can
vary. But, well . . .

Ah, once I’ve arrived at my performance, | pretty well hold to it. OK, it can happen that
someone reads a line with a different inflection or emphasis and then | find myself
changing my reading because he’s changed his. But then later | tend to decide, no,
that’s not it, I’d better keep it the way it was.

185


=== Page 197 ===

Test 4 Key

41Q0f

William:
Sonia:
William:
Sonia:
William:
Presenter:
William:
Sonia:
William:

Presenter:
Sonia:

Now, of course, we both have experience of the stage and of film. | find the level of
satisfaction is the same on camera. Don’t you, Sonia?

| suppose it is, but there are very different satisfactions. In the theatre, | enjoy the
physicality of acting.

The overall discipline ... you need more strength, more energy...

’'m proud of the fact that | have that energy. In the theatre, the pleasures are immediate
— you know exactly how you’re doing it when you’re doing it. And it’s you who decides,
really, how that is each time the curtain goes up.

It's your movements every time. Mind you, !’ve really had very good outings in film, so
there’s no reason for me to complain about the way it works.

So what does a film assignment give a theatre actor, William?

| think it’s learning the intricacies of letting the small things stand for themselves. In
other words, having the confidence to do something on a small level and let it be seen
by the camera...

You can get away with things in the theatre that you can’t in films. You can cover up
certain deficiencies with a kind of theatricality, you can hide certain faults . . .

You can’t do that in film because the camera picks up everything!

I'd like to know what makes a good director from an actor’s point of view. Sonia?

| suppose it’s a combination of things, really. | do like someone who is. ..

{pause]

Now you'll hear Part Four again.
tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

That’s the end of Part Four.

There will now be a pause of five minutes for you to copy your answers onto the separate
answer sheet. Be sure to follow the numbering of all the questions.

Note: Stop/Pause the recording here and time five minutes, In the exam candidates will be
reminded when there is one minute remaining.

[pause]

That's the end of the test. Please stop now. Your supervisor will now collect all the question
papers and answer sheets.
