

=== Page 1 ===

_ PUBLISHING =

CAMBRIDGE

CERTIFICATE

OF PROFICIENCY IN

ENGLISH

EXAMINATION PAPERS FROM TH
UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE LOCAL EXAMINATIONS SYNDICATE

wi

CAMBRIDGE
UNIVERSITY PRESS



=== Page 2 ===

Cambridge Certificate

of Proficiency in English
1

WITH ANSWERS

Examination papers from the
University of Cambridge |
Local Examinations Syndicate

CAMBRIDGE
UNIVERSITY PRESS



=== Page 3 ===

PUBLISHED BY THE PRESS SYNDICATE OF THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE
The Pitt Building, Trumpington Street, Cambridge, United Kingdom

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS

The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 2RU, UK

40 West 20th Street, New York NY 10011-4211, USA

10 Stamford Road, Oakleigh, VIC 3166, Australia

Ruiz de Alarc6n, 28014 Madrid, Spain

Dock House, The Waterfront, Cape Town 8001, South Africa

http://www.cambridge.org
© Cambridge University Press 2001

This book is in copyright, which normally means that
no reproduction of any part may take place without
the written permission of Cambridge University Press.
The copying of certain parts of it by individuals

for use within the classroom, however, is permitted
without such formality. Pages which are copiable
without further permission are identified by a
separate copyright notice:

© UCLES K&}
First published 2001

Printed in the United Kingdom at the University Press, Cambridge

ISBN 0 521 79993 7 Student’s Book

ISBN 0 521 79994 5 Student’s Book with answers
ISBN 0 521 00992 8 Self-study Pack

ISBN 0 521 79995 3 Teacher’s Book

ISBN 0 521 79996 1 Set of 2 Cassettes

ISBN 0 521 00991 X Set of 2 Audio CDs


=== Page 4 ===

Test 1

Test 2

Test 3

Test 4

Test 1

Test 2

Test 3

Test 4

Contents

Thanks and acknowledgements iv

To the student

Paper 1 Reading 4

Paper 2 Writing 14
Paper3 Use of English 16
Paper 4 Listening 24
Paper 5 Speaking 29
Paper 1 Reading 30
Paper 2 Writing 40

Paper 3 Use of English 42
Paper 4 Listening 50
Paper5 Speaking SS
Paper 1 Reading 56
Paper 2 Writing 67

Paper 3 Use of English 69
Paper 4 Listening 77
Paper5 Speaking 82
Paper 1 Reading 83
Paper 2 Writing 94

Paper 3 Use of English 96
Paper 4 Listening 104
Paper 5 Speaking 109

Key and transcript 110

Key and transcript
Key and transcript

Key and transcript

123

136

148

Visual materials for Paper 5 colour section

Sample answer sheets 161

iii


=== Page 5 ===

Thanks and acknowledgements

The publishers are grateful to the following for permission to reproduce copyright material. It has not
always been possible to identify the sources of all the material used and in such cases the publishers
would welcome information from the copyright owners.

Courtesy of Tourism Vancouver for p. 4: an extract from The Vancouver Book - A Visitor’s Guide to
Greater Vancouver; The Random House Group for p. 38: The Razor’s Edge by Somerset Maugham,
published by William Heinneman Ltd. Also for pp. 48-49: extract from Human Jungle by Stanton
Newman, published by Newbury. Also for p. 61: from Waterlog by Roger Deakin, published by Chatto
and Windus. Also for p. 96: from The Human Zoo by Desmond Morris, published by The Human
Zoo. All texts used by permission of The Random House Group. Oldie Publications for p. 5:
‘Supermarket Opening’ by Alice Pitman; The Guardian for p. 6: ‘Screen Learning’ by Maggie Brown
and for p. 75: ‘Oops’ by Merope Mills and for p. 76: ‘Humour in the Workplace’ by Anita Chaudri;
The Economist for p. 7: ‘Hollywood’, pp. 62-63: ‘Online Reviews’ and pp. 89-90: ‘Garbage in,
Garbage Out’; Thames and Hudson Ltd for p. 8: The Picture History of Photography by Peter Pollack;
Walker Books Ltd for p. 9: The Telling Line by Douglas Martin; Piatkus Books for p. 83: Clear Your
Clutter With Feng Shui by Kate Kingston; New Scientist for p. 16: ‘Listening to Alex’ by Irene
Pepperberg; The Geographical Magazine for p. 17: ‘A Question of Taste’ by Chris Hellier; Phaidon
Press Ltd for p. 22: reproduced from ‘The Story of Art’? ©1995 Phaidon Press Limited, text ©1995

E. H. Gombrich; Contemporary Visual Arts for p. 23: ‘The New, No Longer New Zeitgeist’ by Klaus
Hobnef, copyright ownership by OPA N.V. Permission granted by Taylor & Francis Ltd; Penguin
Books for p. 30: The Language Instinct by Steven Pinker; The Spectator for p. 31: ‘An Art anda
Science’; A. P, Watts Ltd on behalf of Graham Swift for p. 33: The Spirit of the Fens by Edward Storey;
Alexander Hayward for p. 34: ‘What is a Museum?’; Little, Brown and Company for pp. 36-37: Sour
Sweet by Timothy Mo; Michael Chinery for p. 42: The Natural History of the Garden; Cambridge
University Press for p. 43: Cambridge Encyclopaedia of Language by David Crystal, 1987; Independent
for p. 56: ‘ Murder Most Moorish’ by Paul Taylor; New Scientist for p. 56: ‘Lake Vostok’; courtesy of
Focus magazine © National Magazine Company for p. 57: ‘Scientists’; Dominic Lutyen for p. 59:
‘Bachelor Fads’; Gay Times/James Carey Parkes 2000 for p. 60: ‘Bruce Chatwin’; Taylor and Francis
Books Ltd for pp. 64-65: The Photography Handbook by Terence Wright; Macmillan for pp. 83-84:
Caves by Tony Waltham; Kingfisher Books for p. 85: ‘Looking at Art’ by Norbert Lynton; The Times
for p. 86: ‘Picture This’ by Waldemar Januszczak; Faber and Faber for p. 88: Justine by Lawrence
Durrell; pp. 91-92: ‘Music and the Ear’ by Genista McIntosh (this first appeared in BBC Music
Magazine, February 2000); Business Traveller Magazine for p. 97: ‘Every Time We Say Goodbye’ by
Raj Persaud.

Text permissions by Fiona Donnelly

Colour section photographs: Superstock for p. C2 (1A); Stone for pp. C2 (1B), C3 (1C) and C7 (3E);
Science Photolibrary for p. C4 (2A); Telegraph Colour Library/Bavaria-Bildagentur for p. C4 (2B);
Stone/Tony Azzura for p. C4 (2C); NPHA for p. C5 (2D); Science Photolibrary/Peter Menzel for p. CS
(2F); Stone/Steve Lewis for p. C5 (2E); Sandra Kennedy for pp. Cé (3A, 3B and 3C) and C7 (3D and
3F); Science Photolibrary/Roger Harris for pp. C8 and C9 (4A).

Picture research by Diane Jones

Cover design by Dunne & Scully

The cassettes which accompany this book were recorded at Studio AVP, London.

iv


=== Page 6 ===

To the student

This book is for candidates preparing for the University of Cambridge Local
Examinations Syndicate (UCLES) Certificate of Proficiency in English (CPE)
examination. It contains four complete tests which reflect the most recent CPE
specifications (introduced in December 2002).

The CPE is part of a group of examinations developed by UCLES called the
Cambridge Main Suite. The Main Suite consists of five examinations which
have similar characteristics but which are designed for different levels of English
ability. Within the five levels, CPE is at Cambridge Level 5.

Cambridge Level 5
Certificate of Proficiency in English (CPE)

Cambridge Level 4
Certificate in Advanced English (CAE)

Cambridge Level 3
First Certificate in English (FCE)

Cambridge Level 2
Preliminary English Test (PET)

Cambridge Level 1
Key English Test (KET)

The CPE examination consists of five papers:

Paper 1 | Reading 1 hour 30 minutes

Paper 2 | Writing 2 hours

;
Paper 3. | Use of English | 1 hour 30 minutes

Paper 4 Listening 40 minutes (approximately)

Paper 5 | Speaking 19 minutes

Paper 1 Reading

This paper consists of four parts with 40 questions, which take the form of
three multiple-choice tasks and a gapped text task. Part 1 contains three short
texts, Part 2 contains four short texts and Parts 3 and 4 each contain one
longer text. The texts are taken from fiction, non-fiction, journals, magazines,
newspapers, and promotional and informational materials. This paper is
designed to test candidates’ ability to understand the meaning of written
English at word, phrase, sentence, paragraph and whole text level.


=== Page 7 ===

To the student

Paper 2 Writing

This paper consists of two writing tasks in a range of formats (e.g. letter,
report, review, article, essay, proposal). Candidates are asked to complete two
tasks, writing between 300 and 350 words for each. Part 1 (Question 1)
consists of one compulsory task based on instructions and a short text. Part 2
(Questions 2—5) consists of one task which candidates select from a choice of
four. Question 5 has a task on one of each of three set texts. Assessment is
based on achievement of task, range and accuracy of vocabulary and
grammatical structures, organisation, content and appropriacy of register and
format.

Paper 3 Use of English

This paper consists of five parts with 44 questions. These take the form of an
open cloze, a word formation task, gapped sentences, key word transformations
and two texts with comprehension questions and a summary writing task. The
paper is designed to assess candidates’ ability to demonstrate knowledge and
control of the language system by completing these tasks which are at text and
sentence level.

Paper 4 Listening

This paper consists of four parts with 28 questions, which take the form of two
multiple-choice tasks, a sentence-completion task and a three-way matching
task. Part 1 contains four short extracts and Parts 2 to 4 each contain one
longer text. The texts are audio-recordings based on a variety of sources
including interviews, discussions, lectures, conversations and documentary
features. The paper is designed to assess candidates’ ability to understand the
meaning of spoken English, to extract information from a spoken text and to
understand speakers’ attitudes and opinions.

Paper 5 Speaking

The Speaking Test consists of three parts, which take the form of an interview
section, a collaborative task and individual long turns with follow-up
discussion. The test is designed to elicit a wide range of language from both
candidates. Candidates are examined in pairs by two examiners, an Interlocutor
and an Assessor. The Assessor awards a mark based on the following criteria:
Grammatical Resource, Lexical Resource, Discourse Management,
Pronunciation and Interactive Communication. The Interlocutor provides a
global mark for the whole test.


=== Page 8 ===

To the student

Marks and results
The five CPE papers total 200 marks, after weighting. Each paper is weighted
to 40 marks.

A candidate’s overall CPE grade is based on the total score gained in all
five papers. It is not necessary to achieve a satisfactory level in all five papers
in order to pass the examination. Pass grades are A, B or C, with A being the
highest. D and E are failing grades. The minimum successful performance in
order to achieve Grade C corresponds to about 60% of the total marks.
Every candidate is provided with a Statement of Results which includes a
graphical display of their performance in each paper. These are shown
against the scale Exceptional - Good — Borderline - Weak and indicate the
candidate’s relative performance in each paper.

The CPE examination is recognised by the majority of British universities
for English language entrance requirements.

Further information
For more information about CPE or any other UCLES examination write to:

EFL Information

University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate
1 Hills Road

Cambridge

CB1 2EU

United Kingdom

Tel: +44 1223 553355

Fax: +44 1223 460278

e-mail: efl@ucles.org.uk
http://www.cambridge-efl.org.uk

In some areas, this information can also be obtained from the British Council.


=== Page 9 ===

Test 1
PAPER 1 READING (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1

For questions 1-18, read the three texts below and decide which answer (A, B, C or D) best fits
each gap.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

Vancouver

In the last ten years or so, hundreds of thousands of people from all over the world have
(1) .... up residence in Vancouver, in western Canada. To relax in the evening, residents
(2) .... down the city streets and, if you join them, you are likely to overhear a different language at
almost every other step. People come to Vancouver for its mild climate, its wonderful setting
between the ocean and the mountains, its clean and safe environment and its educational and job
opportunities. And (3) .... some may grumble about the speed at which new buildings have (4) ....,
there’s no doubt that the new arrivals and (5) .... tourism industry have helped fuel an urban
renaissance. Locals once referred to Vancouver as ‘Terminal City’ because of the city’s role as a
terminus or gateway to all other places. Though the name has fallen slightly out of (6) ....,
Vancouver is more a gateway than ever.

1 A_ taken B put C made D built

2 A_ prowl Bs stumble C_ trudge D-stroll

3 A conversely B_ nevertheless C muchas D_ evenso
4 A sprung up B_ gathered up C piled up D moved up
5 A progressing B_ blooming C flourishing D swelling
6 A approval B_ favour C_ opinion D support

Putting Pen to Paper

Journalists like myself are usually poor letter-writers. | have heard it (7) .... that this is because of
the instinctive distaste we feel at writing something we are not going to be paid for, but | cannot
believe we have quite such mercenary characters. It is more probably that (8) .... in our work, we

4


=== Page 10 ===

Paper 1 Reading

are always (9) .... to get the greatest possible effect, the essential spontaneity of a letter (10) ....
us. The real creative artist, who does not consciously work on the effect at all (though he may re-
write a passage dozens of times), does not have this problem. | believe that it is in this inherent
grasp of the effect of his words that there (11) .... the only sure test of the real artist. When
Shakespeare wrote some of his famous lines he (12) .... never thought consciously that it was the
contrast between polysyliables that made them so effective, as well as showing him to be a great
writer.

7 A said B told Cc remarked D_ presumed
A_ since B for C like D_ once
A. striving B_ exerting C_ contending D tackling
10 A_ misses B_ escapes C_ avoids D passes
11 A goes B_ remains C ilies D exists
12 A_ inevitably B_ confidently C particularly Dssurely

Supermarket Opening

The opening of a new supermarket used to be a bit of an event in Britain. You could always rely
on a soap star, a disc jockey or a minor member of the royal family to come down and cut the
ribbon. Now it seems that new branches are (13) .... up every day in many areas and so the poor
old celebrity has become (14) ..... Why pay a famous person when any Tom, Dick or Harry will
open it for nothing? Last week, waiting pensioners didn’t care who opened the new branch of
Superbuy, (15) ... they were at the front. According to one prospective customer who knew
someone who worked there, the first five men over the (16) .... would be getting a bottle of
aftershave, and the first five women, a bunch of flowers. This (17) .... of information quickly swept
(18) .... the crowd, instilling feelings of smug superiority among those at the front, and envy from
the latecomers.

13 A popping B_ leaping C jumping D nipping
14 A superfluous B excessive C surplus D_ residual
15 A_ despite B_ solongas C_ incase D_ regardless
16 A entrance B doorway C_threshoid D barrier

17 A_ clipping Bs strand C sstring D snippet
18 A among B_ through C across D_ around


=== Page 11 ===

Test 1

Part 2
You are going to read four extracts which are all concerned in some way with the power of visual
images. For questions 19-26, choose the answer (A, B, C or D) which you think fits best according
to the text.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

Screen Learning

A few days ago | noticed my six-year-old eating noodles in a funny way. He was pulling
them up with his teeth while trying to look fierce. ‘I’m a little dinosaur,’ he said. He
was play-acting a scene from a recent TV programme, so | quizzed him about what
he remembered about dinosaurs. The answer was, not a lot.

There is a modish rush to embrace internet and computer learning, but is tearning via
a screen a good method? One writer tells how he tried out an interactive programme
with his son. The father diligently read the words while the son fiddled with the
pictures. ‘Had he spent ten minutes in front of a book, he might possibly have learned
something,’ said his father.

Television, as my son and his noodles demonstrate, is an impressionistic, suggestive
medium. Research about television and learning shows that learning goes on in a
learning environment where dialogue is taking place with teachers or parents. It needs
to be mediated. There is nothing wrong with harnessing new technology to teach our
children, but there is still a big role for formal education.

19 In order to be used successfully in teaching, TV programmes must

be shown in a conventional classroom.
focus on dialogue.

be accompanied by discussion with adults.
appeal to adults and children.

o00ouUuPY

20 The writer believes that ‘screen learning’ should be used

with enthusiasm.

in moderation.

without preconceptions.
in isolation.

coOUP


=== Page 12 ===

21

22

Paper 1

Hollywood

By 1918, four-fifths of the film-making capacity of the world had relocated to
Hollywood. Locals disapproved, seeing their suburb of Los Angeles infected by
these new vulgarians. But in the end snobbery yielded to the true American
value, success. And success is the box-office gross. Hollywood knows a good
film when it sees one: one that may make a star, but must make somebody’s
fortune.

In less than a century, Hollywood has grown from a toffee-nosed village to a
town as famous as New York, Rome or Paris. And physically, of course, it has
changed beyond recognition: a century ago, you would walk through orange
groves to the village store. Yet in a way, it is still a village — parochial, with
limited horizons — just a little bit of Los Angeles. For all who live and work in
it, there is one topic of conversation — films: how much they have made, who is
dating whom, who’s been stabbed in the back, who is ‘attached’ to which
project. Those who have been successful often try to get away: to work there,
but live somewhere else. Yet it is still the one place in the world to which almost
everyone who is anyone in show-business (and plenty who aren’t) eventually
gravitates.

What does the writer say about present-day Hollywood?

The local people still look down on the film industry.
It retains some characteristics of a small community.
It has been adversely affected by its reputation.
People who live there are worried by the violence.

GOP

Who does ‘and plenty who aren't’ refer to in line 16?

people less well-known in the world of entertainment
people not resident in Hollywood

people unlikely to achieve celebrity status

people not welcome in Hollywood

GOU>D

Reading

tine 16


=== Page 13 ===

Test 1

23

24

Photography

Photography was invented by nineteenth century artists as an art form for their
own purposes. These men were seeking a lasting, literal record of their visual
surroundings and they found it. The new combination of illumination, lens,
shutter, and flat surface coated with chemicals sensitive to light produced
images more lasting, more convincing in their reality, and more richly detailed
than painters could produce manually in weeks and months of effort. This alone
was enough to throw consternation into the ranks of fellow artists; and, after
their first reaction of pleasure in a new kind of image, art critics rallied with the
haughty charge that photography was not, and could not be, an art. The actual
world in which we live had too strong a grip on photography, they said, and
pictures so dependent upon mechanical means could not be called acts of man’s
creative imagination.

Despite the critics, photographers knew that they had found a new art form, a
new mode of expression. They used the new tools as other artists before and
after them have used brush and pencil — to interpret the world, to present a
vision of nature and its structure as well as the things and the people in it.

What are we told about the artists who first used photography?

A_ They appreciated what photography could offer.

B_ They preferred taking photographs to painting pictures.

C_ They did not want anyone else to benefit from photography.
D_ They thought painting pictures was too arduous.

Art critics disapproved of photography because they thought

>

it needed too little effort to interpret it.
B_ the images were visually displeasing.
Cit used overly complicated equipment.
D it did not go beyond the literal.


=== Page 14 ===

25

26

Paper 1 Reading

Book Illustration

During the black-and-white era of book illustration it was axiomatic that each and
every children’s book called for some form of illustration. This extended to the
large category of novels for the upper reading ages, which was to suffer progressive
attrition as print runs shortened. The level of activity in all areas of children’s
publishing remained considerable, but it was run predominantly as a low-budget
operation for most of the period and as such encouraged a fair amount of routine
and mediocre work, although the finest artists seldom submitted less than their
professional best. Therefore, the black-and-white archive is part junk shop, part
treasure house; a wonderful place for research or for browsing, and one in which
to make immediate finds or to begin to re-evaluate a fertile artistic period. The real
treasures are bound to return to public display, whether enduringly — through re-
issues of individual titles and new publications about the artists who illustrated
them — or from time to time in the form of exhibitions of original books and
drawings. There are signs that, after a period of neglect, this is starting to happen
and the familiar processes of stylistic rehabilitation can be seen to be at work. In
due course, an enterprising publisher will doubtlessly see the potential for a series
of classic children’s book illustrations from this period either in facsimile reprint,
or in freshly-designed editions using the original artwork where it survives.

According to the writer, the constraints of the black-and-white era

produced varying levels of artistic accomplishment.
restricted the categories of books that were illustrated.
meant that artists had to be chosen from a certain calibre.
did not affect the quality of literature produced at that time.

o00oMU>

Which of the following does the writer predict with confidence?

the production of new black-and-white illustrations

the public’s exposure to artwork from the black-and-white era
the resurgence of general interest in black-and-white books
the availability of a wealth of black-and-white original works

00U>


=== Page 15 ===

Test 1

Part 3

You are going to read an extract from a novel. Seven paragraphs have been removed from the
extract. Choose from the paragraphs A—H the one which fits each gap (27-33). There is one extra

paragraph which you do not need to use.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

'!n those days the council houses stretched all over
the western side of the city: row after row of huddled,
dingy dwellings in orange half-brick or pale white
stucco. In summer the chemicals from the May and
Baker factory two miles away came and hung round
the doors and gardens with an indescribable smell of
sulphur, and the most common sight in that part of
Norwich early in the morning was a paperboy
wrinkling his nose in disgust as he negotiated
somebody’s front path.

2]

That my mother should intrude into these early
memories is no surprise. | remember her as a small,
precise and nearly always angry woman, the source
of whose anger | never quite understood, and
consequently couldn't do anything to appease. Even
as a child, though, accompanying her to the smal
shops in Bunnett Square or on longer excursions into
the city, i'm sure that | had some notion of the oddity
of her personality.

[ae |

As a moral code this was completely beyond my
comprehension: even now I’m not sure that |
understand it. To particularise, it meant not straying
into neighbours’ gardens or jeopardising their rose
bushes as you walked down the street; it meant sitting
for long half-hours in a silent dining room, with your
hands folded across your chest, listening to radio
programmes that my mother liked; it meant — oh, a

hundred proscriptions and prohibitions.

{t was only later that | comprehended what poor
company this trio was; they formed a depressed and
depressing sisterhood, a little dribble of inconsequent

E

10

talk about bad legs, the cold weather and the perils
of ingrate children, a category in which | nearly always
felt myself included.

[

This was easier said than done. Growing up in West
Earlham at this time followed a well-regulated pattern.
Until you were five you simply sat at home and got
under your parents’ feet (| can remember awful
aimless days, when | must have been about four,
playing on a rug in the front room while my mother sat
frostily in an armchair). Then, the September after
your fifth birthday, you were packed off to Avenue
Road infants’ school half a mile away in the direction
of the city.

31

if | remember anything about these early years it’s the
summer holidays; those days when you caught
occasional glimpses of the world that existed outside
West Earlham: a vague old man who lived next door
to Mrs Buddery and told stories about his time in the
Merchant Navy; a charity fete, once, held at a house
far away in Christchurch Road, where a motherly
woman doled out lemonade and tried to get me
interested in something called the League of Pity -a
kind of junior charity, | think — only for my mother, to
whom subsequent application was made, to dismiss
the scheme on the grounds that its organisers were
‘only after your money’.

No doubt | exaggerate. No doubt | ignore her
virtues and magnify her frailties. But there was
precious little milk of human kindness in my mother;
it had all been sucked out of her, sucked out and
thrown away.



=== Page 16 ===

a

My mother wasn’t, it must be known, altogether
averse to this recreation, and eventually almost got to
have opinions on the various subjects presented for

Paper 1 Reading

her edification. | can remember her stopping once in
front of a fine study of a Roman soldier in full battle
gear to remark, ‘Well, | wouldn't like to meet him on
a dark night!’ | recall this as a solitary instance of my
mother attempting to make a joke.

A To do my mother justice she wasn’t unconscious
of her role as the guardian of my education. On
Sundays occasionally, she would take me — in my
‘good clothes’ ~ on the 85 bus to the Norwich
Castle Museum. Here, hand-in-hand, suspicious,
but mindful of the free admission, we would
parade through roomfuls of paintings by the
Norwich School of Artists.

B The lucky few had a mother with a rickety bike
and a child seat —- these were extraordinary
contraptions in cast-iron with improvised safety-
straps. As far as | recall, my mother consigned me
to the care of other children in the street for this
journey.

C Of explanation — who we were, where we came
from, what we were supposed to be doing — there
was none. And yet it seemed to me that my early
life, lived out in the confines of the West Earlham
estate, in a dark little house in a fatally misnamed
terrace called Bright Road, was crammed with
mysteries that demanded explanation. There
was, to take the most obvious, the question of my
father.

D She was, for instance, quite the most solitary
person | have ever known, as alone in a room full
of people as on a moor. To this solitariness was
added a fanatic adhesion to a kind of propriety
uncommon on the West Earlham estate, which
occasionally broke out in furious spring-cleanings
or handwashings and instructions to ‘behave
proper’.

E Mercenary motives were a familiar theme of
my mothers conversation, and _ politicians
my mother held in the deepest contempt of all. If
she thought of the House of Commons — and! am
not sure if her mind was capable of such an
unprecedented leap of the imagination — it was as
a kind of opulent post office where plutocrats
ripped open letters stuffed with five pound notes
sent in by a credulous public.

F Most of this early life I've forgotten. But there is a
memory of sitting, or perhaps balancing, at any
rate precariously, on some vantage point near an
upstairs window, and looking at the houses as
they faded away into the distance. Later on there
are other phantoms — faces that | can’t put names
to, my mother, ironing towels in the back room of
a house that | don’t think was ours, snow falling
over the turrets of the great mansion at Earlham.

G In time other figures emerged onto these stern
early scenes. For all her solitariness, my mother
wasn't without her cronies. There was Mrs
Buddery, who was fixated on the Royal Family;
Mrs Winall, who said exactly nothing, except for
grunts supporting the main speaker; and Mrs
Laband —~ livelier than the others, and of whom
they vaguely disapproved.

H_ Looking back, it was as if a giant paperweight,
composed of the West Earlham houses, my
mother and her cronies, the obligation to ‘behave
proper’, lay across my shoulders, and that it was
my duty immediately to grow up and start the work
of prising it free.

11


=== Page 17 ===

Test 1

Part 4

You are going to read an essay about poetry. For questions 34-40, choose the answer (A, B, C

or D) which you think fits best according to the text.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

POETRY RECITALS

At any given time in history the literary scene will
seem confused to those who are living through it,
and it is the selectivity of posterity that makes the
pattern and orders of eminence appear clearly
defined to the retrospective view. It is fairly safe
to say that, at the present time, there is an
especially bewildering complexity of poetic
tendencies, of kinds of poetry being written, of
warring factions, of ways of presenting, criticising
and teaching poetry, and of conflicting beliefs
about the role of the poet in society.

Very broadly speaking, the present debate in
contemporary poetry concerns the reciprocal
mistrust and disapproval shown by the seriously
committed ‘literary’ writers, whose poems are

live audiences, the issue is plain. They can only
profit from public performance. Their verses are
often very simple in both form and content, and
can be assimilated at a single hearing; it is on the
printed page that the deficiences of thought,
technique and imagination become clear. Poets
who are dedicated to their craft, and are doing
their best to continue and develop what is finest in
the traditions of poetry -— which involves
compressing the maximum amount of passion,
thought, wit and vision into the smallest possible
space and achieving rhythmic effects of great
variety and subtlety ~ are unlikely to be
appreciated by an audience which is probably
encountering their work for the first time. The

- danger here is, not that they will be tempted to line 52
intended to be printed and read on the page, and e y pe |
the ‘popular’, performi ts who, while th emulate the content and style of the entertainers, line 53
. Pop » Performing poets O» wane tney but that they might, in the effort to achieve instant
will probably publish their verses in magazines en : .
: . . communication, read only their most readily line 55
and collections, are happier declaiming them to an . wae oe :
. rns accessible work which is quite likely to be their
audience. Of course, this division is far from . a .
slightest and least characteristic. line 57

absolute.

The practice of promoting public poetry readings
has been steadily increasing over the past twenty
years or so, in many different forms. Small
literary societies in provincial towns conduct
them in village halls or the sitting rooms of their
members; schools and colleges invite poets to
read and talk to audiences of students; arts
festivals often advertise poetry readings by
well-known authors on their programmes. The
consequences of all these events, and of poets
being more or less obliged to become public
performers, are manifold and of uncertain benefit
to them as artists.

For the ‘pop’ poets, whose work has been
composed expressly for the purpose of recital to

12

Attendance at poetry reading cannot be a
substitute for reading poetry on the page, though
it can be an enjoyable and instructive adjunct. To
hear good poets read their work aloud, even if they
are not accomplished public speakers, is a
valuable guide as to where the precise emphases
are to be placed, but it is desirable that the
audience should either follow the reading with
the text before them or have a prior knowledge of
the poems being spoken. The principal
justification for popular recitals of poetry, where
the readings are sometimes interspersed with
musical items (jazz and poetry used to be a very
popular mixture), is that audiences will come to
associate poetry with pleasure and not feel that it
is an art available only to an initiated minority.


=== Page 18 ===

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

00UY

Paper 1 Reading

What general observation about poetry does the writer make in the opening paragraph?

A The present literary climate is not conducive to good poetry.

B_ Modern poems appear unplanned and chaotic to him.

C_ The greatness of poets only emerges in retrospect.

D_ Today’s poetry compares unfavourably with that of previous generations.

What does the writer think about the present conflict in poetry?

A He blames it on the serious poets.

B_ The distinction between ‘serious’ and ‘popular’ is seldom clear cut.
C_ It stems from the attitude of the audience.

D_ The popular poets take pleasure in criticising the serious poets.

According to the writer, how might a serious poet feel about a public recital?

uneasy about the practical arrangements
bound to accept for financial reasons
pleased to reach a wider audience
under pressure to take part

The writer feels that the work of some popular poets

does not stand up to close analysis.

is part of a long poetic tradition.

is undervalued by experienced audiences.
benefits from being written down.

900OUPY

Which word is used to refer disparagingly to the popular poets?

A_ tempted (line 52)
B_ entertainers (line 53)
C communication (line 55)
D slightest (line 57)

The writer concedes that public performances

are an introduction to poetry for some people.

may lead some people to acquire a taste for more serious poetry.
can be instructive as regards public speaking.

can be a good supplement to serious, written poetry.

00oU>

In the text as a whole, the writer’s purpose is to

foster greater unity among poets.

give advice to would-be poets.

persuade us of the value of poetry recitals.
analyse a current debate in the world of poetry.

00UNPY

13


=== Page 19 ===

Test 1
PAPER 2. WRITING (2 hours)

Part 1

You must answer this question. Write your answer in 300-350 words in an appropriate style.

1 Your local council is proposing to ban all cars from the town centre because of problems with
traffic, pollution and accidents. However, the following comments were made at a public meeting
to discuss the situation:

My car is the only way | have of taking my
children to school safely and quickly.

The shops in the town centre will close because
people will go elsewhere to do their shopping.

val

Public transport here is dreadful. We can’t
rely on it and it is too expensive.

The !ocal council is inviting people to send in proposals in which they express their views
on the council’s plan and offer possible solutions to people’s concerns.

Write your proposal.

14


=== Page 20 ===

Paper 2 Writing

Part 2

Write an answer to one of the questions 2—5 in this part. Write your answer in 300-350 words in an
appropriate style.

2 A magazine has asked its readers to contribute to a series of articles called ‘Things | want to
achieve in the next ten years’. Readers are invited to submit articles in which they describe the
achievements they feel are most important, and to give reasons for their choice. The article
should make other readers think about the most important things in life.

Write your article.

3 The ‘Family Page’ in your local newspaper has invited readers to write in with descriptions of
how they learnt the value of money when they were children. You decide to write a letter
describing how as a child you came to appreciate the value of money, and how important money
is to you now in relation to other things in your life.

Write your letter. Do not write any postal addresses.

4 The local history society you belong to produces a magazine whose purpose is to promote an
appreciation of the past and the value of studying history. You have been asked to write a
contribution for the magazine. You decide to write a report of a visit you have made to an
historical building or site, pointing out how such visits can encourage the study of history.
Write your report.

5 Based on your reading of one of these books, write on one of the following.

{a) Anne Tyler: The Accidental Tourist

An arts magazine is planning a series on ‘The Family in Twentieth Century Literature’. It has
invited readers to send in a review of a book in which relationships between brothers and sisters
play an important part. You decide to send in a review of The Accidental Tourist. You should
focus on Macon’s relationship with his brother and sister, and how and why this relationship
changes during the novel.

Write your review.

(b) John Wyndham: The Day of the Triffids

A popular science magazine has invited articles on the theme of survival after major disasters.
You send in an article based on your reading of The Day of the Triffids, outlining the events in
the story and discussing how the survivors deal with their situation.

Write your article.

(c) Graham Greene: Our Man in Havana
You read the following opinion in a literary magazine:

‘Now that International Relations have improved, spy novels have become an outdated and uninteresting
literary form.

t
You disagree and believe that Our Man in Havana is more than just a spy story. Write a letter to
the magazine, making reference to the events, characters and relationships described in the book.

Write your letter. Do not write any postal addresses.

15


=== Page 21 ===

Test 1
PAPER 3 USE OF ENGLISH (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1

For questions 1-15, read the text below and think of the word which best fits each space. Use only
one word in each space. There is an example at the beginning (0).

Write your answers in CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet.

Example: | 0 || T HE S E| | | | | |

CAN PARROTS COMMUNICATE?

meaning? Two decades ago, researcher Irene Pepperberg started working with Alex, an African
grey parrot, and ever since then, she has been building (1) ............... data on him. Pepperberg,
recently published book The Alex Studies makes fascinating reading, claims Alex

doesn’t copy speech but intentionally uses words to get (3) ............... it is that he wants.

In actual (4) we , some of his cognitive skills are identical to those of a five-year-old child.
(5) wee a child’s, Alex’s learning has been a steady progression. Early on, he (6) ..............
vocalise whether two things were the same or different. Now, he carries (7) .............- more complex
tasks. Presented (8) ............. different-coloured balls and blocks and asked the number of red
blocks, he’ll answer correctly. He requests things as well. (9) ............... he ask to sit on your shoulder
and you put him (10) ....... else, he’ll complain: ‘Wanna go shoulder.’

A (11) ............... experts remain sceptical, seeing very (12) ............... in Alex’s performance beyond
learning by association, by (13) ............... of intensive training. Yet Alex appears to (14) ......00...
mastered simple two-way communication. As parrots live for 60 years or more, Alex may surprise
(15) ............. all further.

16


=== Page 22 ===

Paper 3 Use of English

Part 2

For questions 16—25, read the text below. Use the word given in capitals at the end of some of
the lines to form a word that fits in the space in the same line. There is an example at the

beginning (0).

Write your answers in CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet.

o|[F [LA] vfo]uyR

[TTI

INE

Example:

VANILLA

Thanks to the ubiquitous use of vanilla as a (0) flavouring, in ice creams

and cakes the world over, its taste is more (16) to the majority of

people than the appearance of the plant.

The plant itself is actually a native of the tropical forests of Central America
and is the only variety of orchid to be grown on a commercial scale. Its delicate
white flowers open in the early morning and, after pollination by insects or

humming birds, a narrow bean-like pod forms and (17) , taking a
period of five to seven months to reach (18) ............... . It is this pod which is

harvested to provide the food crop we know as vanilla.

Despite its American origins, for decades it was only cultivated (19) ...............
on the Indian Ocean island of Madagascar, where it was introduced at the end
of the nineteenth century. It soon became clear that the vanilla grown there

was of a quality (20) in other areas, and the island quickly became

one of the world’s major (21) ..........0. .

In recent years, however, new (22) have entered the vanilla market
and, (23)
the (24)

development of artificial substitutes is (25) ..

, Madagascar’s importance has started to slip. Of course,

of new producers means a smaller market share, whilst the

.. to undermine demand for

the real thing.

FLAVOUR
RECOGNISE

RIPE
MATURE

EXTEND

KNOW
SUPPLY

COMPETE
CONSEQUENCE
EMERGE
THREAT

17


=== Page 23 ===

Test 1

Part 3

For questions 26-31, think of one word only which can be used appropriately in all three sentences.
Here is an example (0).
Example:

0 Some of the tourists are hoping to get compensation for the poor state of the hotel, and | think
they have @ VeTY ....... cee case.

There’s no point in trying to wade across the river, the Current is far t00 oo... essences «

If you’re asking me which of the candidates should get the job, ’'m afraid | don’t have any
deeesesesneseseneeesseneaeasanenes views either way.

[o|[s|t[R}o[N[o] | | |

Write only the missing word in CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet.

26 The prize-winning sculpture IS OM oe eeteteteeeeeeetene at the National Gallery this week.
As we rounded the bend, the first few houses Came into «0.0... eeeeteeeeeee
There is a widespread ..0...... eee that too much sugar is bad for you.

27 We need to give SOME oon... ececeeeeeeeteeeteees consideration to the downturn in our sales, and
come up with a new marketing strategy.

The economic Situation 1S SO ee eeeceeteneereeee that the government has been forced to
raise taxes.
He seems a real joker, but there’s @ MOM ves rereeeee side to him, you know.

28 Francesca and Kate both oes a strong resemblance to their brother.

Life is too short to a grudge against your critics.

Once you reach the crossroads, ...
turning on the right.

. left, and after that it’s the second

18


=== Page 24 ===

29

30

31

Paper 3 Use of English

The police officer warned the boys to KEP 00... eeesesteseseeeeeneneeee of trouble.

Sophie isn’t at all oe eeeeeeeeene about her plans for the future.

From this viewpoint you can see the Rif Mountains On @ ou... ceceeeseeeteeee day.

Jane left the engine .... .... While she delivered the parcel.

I’m surprised to hear the Governor of California iS oo... cceeeeeeeeees for President.

Pve had that tune oc eeeeeeeeeeeeeeee through my head ever since | heard it last week.
The team did SO... cceeeeeeseeeeeeees in the heats that they did not even reach the quarter-
finals.

Some of our tre@S WEL ooo. eeeceseeseseeeesenenes damaged in the storm.

Their roof has been leaking for some time And is ou... eee in need of repair.

19


=== Page 25 ===

Test 1

Part 4

For questions 32-39, complete the second sentence so that it has a similar meaning to the first
sentence, using the word given. Do not change the word given. You must use between three
and eight words, including the word given.

Here is an example (0).

Example:
0 Do you mind if | watch you while you paint?
objection

Do you ....

| 0 have any objection to my watching

Write only the missing words on the separate answer sheet.

.... you while you paint?

32 The author describes his childhood vividly in the book.
account

The author's DOOK ou. ecceeesesessesseeseenessseeeseseeareseeavenseereseestessssenesseaneneeaeenneenene his childhood.

33 This plant often gets attacked by insects.
prone

THIS PLAN oe cece teseseseeseseestsesssesececeseseesenssesssesessseseassessesnseeteeeneeee by insects.

34 Do you have any idea about how Jack made enough money to buy that new sports car?
light

CAN YOU occ eee neereeeeneretteatsensnessesseneetennsatensearenseanentensanssiease Jack made enough money
to buy that new sports car?

20


=== Page 26 ===

35

36

37

38

39

It was not.

Paper 3 Use of English

Kate has finally accepted that their friendship is over.
terms

Kate has finally ...
over.

.. their friendship is

| wasn’t expecting you to begin singing when they asked you to speak.
took ‘

It eececceesesesesssscesesessssessesesssscsesucsesessesesnssssuesesesseeeestensaeeneaeseseeenenees singing when they asked you to

HID oc eeesesesesseesesssscessncsesesssnansesssscseseesaesesecucasassnsnsucacacaescanerenes her cold.

Only when the storm subsided was it clear just how much damage had been done.
extent

of the damage was clear.

When he won the scholarship, Alan began to realise just how lucky he was.
dawn

When he won the scholarship, it DEQan «00... seeeeetesteeeeesrenesneensseeseensstesnaseesesseenesneneesiaee
just how lucky he was.

21


=== Page 27 ===

Test 1

Part 5

For questions 40-44, read the following texts about art. For questions 40—43, answer with a word
or short phrase. You do not need to write complete sentences. For question 44, write a summary
according to the instructions given.

Write your answers to questions 40—44 on the separate answer sheet.

40

41

22

A critic may crush an artist by telling him that what he has just done may be quite
good in its own way, only it is not ‘Art’. And that same critic may confound anyone
enjoying a picture by declaring that what he liked in it was not the Art but something
different.

Actually, I do not think there are wrong reasons for liking a statue or picture.
Someone may like a landscape painting because it reminds him of home, or a portrait
because it reminds him of a friend. There is nothing wrong with that. All of us, when
we see a painting, are bound to be reminded of a hundred and one things which
influence our likes and dislikes. As long as these memories help us to enjoy what we
see, we need not worry. It is only when some irrelevant memory makes us
prejudiced, when we instinctively turn away from a magnificent picture of an alpine
scene because we dislike climbing, that we should search our mind for the reason
for the aversion which spoils a pleasure we might otherwise have had. There are
wrong reasons for disliking a work of art.

Most people like to see in pictures what they would also like to see in reality. This
is quite a natural preference. We all like beauty in nature, and are grateful to the
artists who have preserved it in their works.

line 10

In your own words, explain how, according to the writer, a viewer might react to a critic’s

comments about a work of art.

Explain what the writer means by ‘some irrelevant memory makes us prejudiced’
(lines 10-11).


=== Page 28 ===

42

43

44

Paper 3 Use of English

Art has changed over the last few decades. Although continual change is the
very essence of art, the most recent changes run far more deeply, and go
beyond external appearances. The very concept of art is in fact being
questioned. At first glance it might indeed seem to be mainly a matter of
ephemeral and non-essential questions. For instance, contemporary art has
never before enjoyed such wide popularity. Prices are soaring, and private
collectors are currently placing an unprecedented number of orders. The prices
for modern classics at auctions in London and New York have reached
unimaginable heights, as art is increasingly regarded as a sound investment
for the future.

Contemporary art has in fact become an integral part of today’s middle-class
society. Even works of art which are fresh from the studio are met with
enthusiasm. They receive recognition rather quickly — too quickly for the taste
of the surlier culture critics. Of course, not all works of art are bought
immediately, but there is undoubtedly an increasing number of people who
enjoy buying brand new works of art. Instead of fast and expensive cars, they
buy the paintings, sculptures and photographic works of young artists. They
know that contemporary art also adds to their social prestige. Furthermore,
since art is not exposed to the same wear and tear as automobiles, it is - in
principle - a far better investment.

line 6

Explain in your own words the evidence given by the writer of the ‘wide popularity’ (line 6)

of art today.

Which phrase suggests new works of art are not always received positively when first
displayed?

In a paragraph of between 50 and 70 words, summarise in your own words as far as
possible the reasons given in the texts for why the public appreciate art. Write your
summary on the separate answer sheet.

23


=== Page 29 ===

Test 1
PAPER 4 LISTENING (40 minutes approximately)

Part 1

You will hear four different extracts. For questions 1-8, choose the answer (A, B or C) which fits

best according to what you hear. There are two questions for each extract.

You hear part of a discussion about a composer who writes film music.

1 The speaker particularly valued Nunan’s earlier film music because
A_ it portrayed suffering so well.
Bit was so passionate.
Cit gave insight to the film.

2 How does the speaker feel about Nunan’s current work?

A cynical
B_ angry
C_ confused

You hear part of an interview with an expert on human behaviour.

3 What does the expert's work involve?

A_ transferring standard techniques from one field to another
B_ persuading store employees to help in collecting data
C_ interviewing customers in stores

4 According to the expert's explanation, what is the purpose of a ‘tracker’?

A_ to interview customers for market research
B_ to gather information unobtrusively
C to influence people’s buying behaviour

24



=== Page 30 ===

Paper 4 Listening

Extract 3

You hear part of a radio programme in which a financial expert is asked about investing money in
stocks and shares.

5 What is the expert doing when he speaks?
A_ warning against specific investments
B_ suggesting several courses of action | [s|
C comparing investment techniques
6 According to the expert, what might make one investor more successful than the others?

A_ having in-depth knowledge of a subject
B_ benefiting from previous investment experience

C_ investing in a wide range of companies

You hear the beginning of a radio interview with Irene Donovan, who leads an all-woman band.

7 lrene mentions the people who approach her because she wants to point out that

A_ her band is the only one of its type.
B_ there are several all-woman bands with her name. . | [7

C_ she leads the best known all-woman band.

8 How did other band leaders react when Irene started her band?

A_ They expected it to last only a short time. .
B_ They were worried about the competition from her band.

C_ They were surprised there were enough woman musicians.

25


=== Page 31 ===

Test 1

Part 2

You will hear part of a radio programme about chocolate. For questions 9-17, complete the
sentences with a word or short phrase.

Chocolate was originally regarded as a 9 | food.
The 10 | of chocolate is what makes us crave it.

During the manufacturing process the liquid chocolate is made smoother by passing it through

Wt
In order to achieve an enjoyable
| 12 | a thick emulsion is necessary.

According to Professor Warburton, some people may eat too much chocolate as a kind of

E

A certain constituent of chocolate is known to increase

| 14 | and blood sugar.

Eating chocolate may be one way of controlling

15 | after something upsetting happens.

Stress hormones are produced as a result of a feeling of

c

Corinne Sweet says people become addicted to chocolate because they have a

[a7

26


=== Page 32 ===

Paper 4 Listening

u

Part 3

You will hear an interview with Derek Allen, an author, about the writing process. For questions
18-22, choose the answer (A, B, C or D) which fits best according to what you hear.

18 Derek Allen thought his book would be successful because

it deals with an unusual subject.

he did a lot of research for it.
its packaging was appealing.

he invested a lot of effort in it.

00oNU>Y

19 Allen says that writing for radio is useful because it

A can be good preparation for writing a book.
B~ makes you popular with a wide audience.

: : 19
C requires the same dialogue as a book.
D allows you to introduce a variety of characters.

20 Allen says he uses science fiction because

it represents his vision of what the future will be like.
many events can happen in a short space of time.
he wants to make it popular among readers.

it allows him to explore a bizarre chain of events.

20

G0OWNp

21 According to Allen, other writers use coincidence to

throw light on characters.
resolve difficulties with storylines.
make the reader work harder.
introduce an element of danger.

00OWNpY

22 ‘If Allen was a painter, which element of a painting would he get wrong?

A the background

B_ the shape of the figures
C_ the proportions

D the detail

27


=== Page 33 ===

Test 1

Part 4

You will hear two travel agents talking about the rise in popularity of adventure holidays. For
questions 23-28, decide whether the opinions are expressed by only one of the speakers, or
whether the speakers agree.

Write D_ for Daniel
H_ for Helena

or B for Both, where they agree.

23 Those who try adventure holidays soon find themselves addicted. 23
24 Adventure travellers are seeking an escape from their monotonous lives. 24
25 It seems as if adventure holidays would be a drain on your energy. 25
26 = The thrill of adventure travel lies in being trapped in frightening situations. 26
27 People expect more from travel than their parents did. 27
28 Avwill to learn is the most important prerequisite for adventure travel. . 28

28


=== Page 34 ===

Paper 5 Speaking

PAPER 5 SPEAKING (19 minutes)

There are two examiners. One (the Interlocutor) conducts the test, providing you with the necessary
materials and explaining what you have to do. The other examiner (the Assessor) will be introduced
to you, but then takes no further part in the interaction.

Part 1 (3 minutes)

The Interlocutor first asks you and your partner a few questions which focus on information about
yourselves and personal opinions.

Part 2 (4 minutes)

In this part of the test you and your partner are asked to talk together. The Interlocutor places a
set of pictures on the table in front of you. This stimulus provides the basis for a discussion. The
Interlocutor first asks an introductory question which focuses on one or two of the pictures. After
about a minute, the Interlocutor gives you both a decision-making task based on the same set of
pictures.

The pictures for Part 2 are on pages C2—C3 of the colour section.

Part 3 (12 minutes)

You are each given the opportunity to talk for two minutes, to comment after your partner has
spoken and to take part in a more general discussion.

The Interlocutor gives you a card with a question written on it and asks you to talk about it for
two minutes. After you have spoken, your partner is first asked to comment and then the
Interlocutor asks you both another question related to the topic on the card. This procedure is
repeated, so that your partner receives a card and speaks for two minutes, you are given an
opportunity to comment and a follow-up question is asked.

Finally, the Interlocutor asks some further questions, which leads to a discussion on a general
theme related to the subjects already covered in Part 3.

The cards for Part 3 are on pages C10—C11 of the colour section.



=== Page 35 ===

Test 2
PAPER 1 READING (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1

For questions 1-18, read the three texts below and decide which answer (A, B, C or D) best fits
each gap.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

Language

You and | belong to a species with a remarkable ability; we can shape events in each other’s brains
with exquisite precision. Language is so (1) .... woven into human experience that it is scarcely
possible to imagine life without it. (2) .... are that if you find two or more people together anywhere
on earth, they will soon be (3) .... words. When there is no one to talk with, people talk to
themselves, to their dogs, even to their plants. | like to describe the skill of language as an ‘instinct’.
This (4) .... the idea that people know how to talk in more or less the sense that spiders know how
to spin webs. Web-spinning was not invented by some unsung spider genius, and does not (5) ....
having had the right education or on having an (6) .... for architecture or the construction trades.

1 A_ rigidly B tightly Cs stiffly Ds tautly

2 A Chances B_ Probabilities C Reasons D_ Explanations
3 A_ sharing B_ reciprocating Cc exchanging D trading

4 A_ transmits B_ disseminates C transfers D conveys

5 A_ build on B_ depend on C count on D_ bankon

6 A aptitude B_ applicability C intuition D intelligence

Climate and Weather

‘Climate and weather, which are mainly created by the air around us, profoundly affect the lives
and distribution of animals and plants. Climate can be a dominating force on the character of
landscapes. For example, warmth and wetness all the year round allow the growth of tropical
jungles, which are natural (7) .... troves, with an incredible diversity of species. (8) .... cold,

30


=== Page 36 ===

Paper 1 Reading

windswept areas can muster only a scattered selection of living things. The daily weather patterns
that (9) .... up in the long term to the climate are caused by great masses of air rising and mixing,
for the atmosphere is never still. Some of the motion is (10) .... the fact that the envelope of gases
rests on a spinning globe; because air is thin it is not dragged along at the same speed as the
earth, but tends to (11) .... behind. A more important (12) .... of turbulence, or air movement,
however, is the sun.

7 A prize B treasure C_ fortune D trophy

8 A Subsequently B_ Conversely C Simultaneously D_ Eventually
9 A_ make B join C add D load

10 A along with ; B_apart from C dueto D_ given that
11 A lag Bsstray C delay D linger

12 A root B_sspring C font D_ source
Coffee

My duties as bar-person included serving drinks but, more worryingly, | was to be responsible for
making coffee. In Lygon Street, Melbourne, a restaurant can stand or fall on its coffee reputation.
There followed several days of intensive coffee-making training, in which i (13) .... more than | could
ever wish to know about the cleaning and (14) .... of the restaurant's gleaming espresso machine.
I learnt, too, about the essential principles (15) .... in making the perfect cup of rich, frothy cappuccino.
By the end of the first week | had to admit that making a decent cup of coffee was not as easy as
it looked and | (16) .... expected to be (17) .... to lowly ash-tray wiping duties again. Luckily, my
boss was a patient man. ‘Making coffee is both an art and a science,’ he said, ‘and you need time
to (18) .... the knack.’

13 A_ took in B.carried off C pulled through D_ looked up
14 A_ catering B_sservice C preservation D_ maintenance
15 A concerned B involved C needed D established
16 A_ fully B_ wholly Cc mainly D nearly

17 A_ banished B_ deported C punished D_ ordered

18 A achieve B attain C activate D acquire

31


=== Page 37 ===

Test 2

Part 2
You are going to read four extracts which are all concerned in some way with the notion of heritage.
For questions 19-26, choose the answer (A, B, C or D) which you think fits best according to the
text.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

Heritage

The true meaning and significance of heritage is that it gives people and communities a genuine
sense of connection with the past. Obviously, we feel connected to our personal heritage —
usually, we know who and what our grandparents were, and we will have heard stories about
how they lived. But, beyond that, there is a wider basic need to learn about our past, in order
to help us understand and interpret our individual and national futures. Heritage represents a
fundamental desire for continuity — assurance about the past goes a long way to assuring our
future. It is through this continuity that we achieve our own place in history, our own
‘immortality’.

In the same way that you inherit your genes, you also inherit a culture which has been passed
down through many generations. There are aspects of your national heritage that you may not
like or condone, but it is yours, and it is reassuring to feel a part of something.

Heritage has a phenomenal amount to teach us and, | would say, is imperative for our well-
being. It affects everything from customs to materia! culture. Traditionally, our link with the
past was through the stories and legends passed down by our ancestors. But, because Western
industrial society broke up communities and families, much of that oral tradition has already
been lost. Instead, places and architectural ‘memories’ give us clues to our past. It is vitally
important to conserve and restore these links as a testament to our ancestors’ identity.

19 How can the writer's argument in the first paragraph best be summarised?

Heritage can reveal a lot about what might happen to us.
Heritage can teach us a lot about how our grandparents lived.
Heritage enables us all to feel important and famous.
Heritage makes us wish for stability and security.

00ON>

20 The writer’s main intention is to

supply information.
give a definition.
suggest an approach.
encourage research.

c0oa>

32


=== Page 38 ===

21

22

Paper 1 Reading

The Fens

Some while ago I began a novel, Waterland, in which, though I did not know it
then, the landscape of that part of England known as the Fens was to play a major
part. Since the novel was published I have often been asked why, as an ignorant
and perhaps presumptuous Londoner, I chose to write about a part of the country
with which I have no personal connection. The short answer is that I chose the
Fens because of their apparent unobtrusiveness ~ a flat and empty stage on which
to set the drama of my book. This, as I learnt, was merely theory. The Fens, once
one’s imagination has got to grips with them, are neither flat nor empty. What I
discovered was that the Fens, while as richly English as any other part of England,
are also compellingly and hauntingly strange. It is remarkable that there should
still exist in the middle of England a region which most English people find
peculiarly foreign, especially when so many other distinctive (and remoter) areas
of Britain have been ingested into the nation’s cultural and literary heritage. The
Fens are both empty and brimming, both cultivated and tenaciously wild,
apparently ‘open’ and ‘obvious’ yet profoundly mysterious.

My own physical researches while writing my novel were in fact not so extensive.

I have never been, yet, to Wisbech or Prickwillow. As a writer of fiction J am
interested in imagined worlds, and I would much rather hazard an inspired guess
at some point of authenticity than go for documentary proof. Yet this very
attempt to ‘imagine’ the Fens has its special logic, for, as the pages of Edward
Storey’s scholarly book abundantly show, the Fens are, peculiarly, not just a
landscape but a state of mind.

What does the writer come to realise about the Fens?

He underestimated the area at first.

He needed a more inspiring setting for his novel.

He should have done more research about the area.
He was wrong to think of the area as typically English.

90NU»Y

What distinction can be made between the writer and Edward Storey?

Storey has a greater eye for detail.
Storey is the more rational writer.

Their books serve different purposes.
They interpret the Fens in opposite ways.

o00MN>

33


=== Page 39 ===

Test 2

23

24

34

Museums

Museums must make their collections accessible. In the past, this simply meant
packing them into display cases, often with wordy labels that made little
concession to the lay person. Nowadays, accessibility should demand more
than this. Displays can be lively and interesting, making the best use of
theatrical or architectural techniques to capture visitors’ attention and perhaps
stimulate emotional response. But museums should be about more than their
displays. They should make their collections accessible to the widest possible
community. The provision of loan boxes of objects for class teachers is one
known example of this and, recently, this principle has been extended by some
museums so that similar material is made available for use in treating elderly
people who are losing their memory.

Museums concern themselves with ‘artefacts and specimens’ — not replicas.
They exist to facilitate an encounter with authenticity. They present items that
actually existed - were used - had meaning — at some historical time. This is
their great strength, and is what distinguishes them from heritage centres and
theme parks, books and CD-ROMs. Museums which rise to the challenge which
this distinction implies and provide exciting and accessible displays,
catalogues and outreach programmes, will find that their apparent competitors
in ‘virtual history’ are in fact their allies, stimulating an appetite for the ‘real
thing’ that museums are uniquely placed to satisfy.

The advantage of today’s museums over older museums is that

they draw on resources in the community.
they are more affordable for the non-expert.
they go beyond the merely visual.

they have more space for their collections.

u0aoU>Y

In the second paragraph, the writer implies that museums
A are failing to keep pace with changing technology.

B_ need to realise that their future lies in their own efforts.
C may have been too competitive in the past.

Dare too preoccupied with the notion of authenticity.


=== Page 40 ===

Paper 1 Reading

Architecture and Environment

The desire to preserve things is not new, but now change in our towns comes with
such speed and on such a scale that most of us are affected by it in some way. It
turns some people into rabid preservationists and it encourages others to think more
closely about the nature of towns as we know them today and their future.

It may be quite reasonably argued that the generations who have lived through
events such as world wars and the like are more inclined to preservation than their
predecessors — anything which expresses stability becomes important. If there is a
psychological need for preservation it is part of the planner’s job to take account
of it.

Change is no enemy if we learn how to handle it. Physical change, in other words,
change in the environment provided by our towns, reflects social change — change
in our numbers, in our welfare and in our demands.

25 What is the writer's view of change?

It can be managed effectively.

It is a consequence of catastrophe.
It is a psychological necessity.

It should be avoided if possible.

00MU>Y

26 In this passage, the writer is

A_ analysing a problem.
B outlining his position.
C presenting his objections.
D_ rejecting opposing views.

35


=== Page 41 ===

Test 2

Part 3

You are going to read an extract from a novel. Seven paragraphs have been removed from the
extract. Choose from the paragraphs A-H the one which fits each gap (27-33). There is one extra

paragraph which you do not need to use.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

The two sisters kept Lily’s driving a secret from
Chen for some time. She would drive around the
allotments and the railway line and gasworks,
shooting the tiny hump-backed bridge with all
four wheels in the air and a tremendous bump
(Lily’s only misjudgement), before completing
the journey by the gasworks in an odour of
sulphur and brimstone. Chen, however, was
actually amused by what his wife had been
doing behind his back. ‘So you can really drive
it then, Lily? Well done!’

27

They fixed on a Monday at the beginning of next
month. This was the slackest day of the week;
they decided to leave early in the morning and
return by midday. That way they need lose no
customers. In the meantime Lily would practise
around the allotments.

28

Within an hour of stepping over the newspapers
and out of the front door, they were looking at
the English Channel. Lily had driven impeccably.
Even Mui, sitting in the back ready to give
directions, one hand on the cross-braces of Man
Kee’s rompers as he pressed his nose against
the window, had to grant this. On the road Lily
had actually overtaken a couple of laggard
vehicles with immense verve and such timing
that Mui had pressed her lips closely together
against her own protest. Chen went as far as
applauding.

36

She was unclear about the meanings of the
various roadmarkings and preferred to pay a fee
rather than risk being towed away. Or even
being served with a summons. Might this
evidence of basic prudence set Mui’s mind at
rest? On the way down Lily had several times
observed her elder sister's taut face in the
driving mirror, which she used with great
frequency. Perhaps it would be best not to put
worries in Mui’s mind which would not have
occurred to her in the first place. Lily personally
locked all the van doors and meticulously tested
each in turn.

[20

Taken aback, Chen took Man Kee ahead of the
two sisters to look at the grey barbarian sea. He
perched Son on the top railing and put his arms
around his stomach. Man Kee was a soft, warm,
and what was more, these days an increasingly
responsive bundle. He reacted by putting his
hand, a tiny replica of the shape of Chen’s, with
its broad palm and stubby fingers, on his father’s
sleeve.

31

There was a trail of smoke just before the
horizon met the sea in a thin line and then,
suddenly shimmering in the glitter of the rising
morning sun on the metal waves, a hull; and in
a small curve of the railings was a grey telescope.
The sparkle of the water instantly altered Chen’s
mood.


=== Page 42 ===

Paper 1 Reading

32

=|

Chen lifted Man Kee to the eyepiece. ‘Do you
see the ship, Son?’ he asked softly. ‘It is a
special little ship for people like us, Son. It is
very little and very old but that is only what
strangers see. We know better, don’t we, Son,
because it is the ship that will take us all back
home when we are finished here. It will take you
to your homeland, Son, which you have never
seen.’

Man Kee would not be parted from the
telescope and when he had been persuaded
to relinquish his grip the whirring inside the
mounting had stopped and all Lily could see was
a quivering opaque circle of white light with a
scratched surface. By the time Chen had found
a second coin the ship was over the horizon and
Lily was left with a view of seagulls scavenging
gash in the wake.

A He putacoin in the slot and trained the glass
on the ship. He was unable to find it at first,
although he had aimed off carefully with the
gun-sight on top of the barrel. Chen swung
the tube in wide circles. There it was! Gone
again. Chen swivelled the instrument more
carefully. Now he had it in the centre of the
circle, surprisingly large, red, and very rusty
with a small bow wave: tramp steamer.

B They went along the promenade. There was
an amusement arcade, built into the cliff.
They stared at the rows of fruit machines, the
gauntlet of pin-ball tables. Chen was fumbling
in his pocket when Lily gave him a coin.

C Men were strange creatures, Mui thought.
Brother-in-law should have been upset about
this. Yet he was soon enthusiastically
making plans with Lily for a jaunt and
obviously revelling in her mastery of this new
skill.

D And it was in that moment that Chen
resolved to bring Son up his way. He would
have an education in figures (Chen’s own
weak point) and grow up to own many
restaurants, gaining experience in all
aspects of the trade on the way. The sombre
sea put Chen in a pleasing melancholy as he
planned Man Kee’s career.

E Now, after coming through the gasworks of
this seaside town (reassuring, familiar sight),
past the lagoon and its miniature motor
boats, they were moving smoothly along the
empty promenade. Lily parked in a small
street off the sea front which was full of
empty bays.

F Chen kissed the top of Man Kee’s head.

Behind him now were Lily and Mui. Lily put
her arm round Husband's shoulders. ‘The
little old ship,’ said Chen. ‘Let your mother
see, Son.’

G ‘Don't worry,’ Chen joked. ‘No one will want
that heap of tin.’ The girls bristled. Lily
accused her husband of ingratitude. Mui
rebuked him for being proud and too readily
deceived by appearances.

H Resolved to go along with the majority
despite her personal misgivings, Mui had
been to buy a road-map. She had been
able to get a ten percent discount, which
impressed Chen, though Lily felt a bit insulted
by Mui’s lack of faith in her navigating
abilities.

37


=== Page 43 ===

Test 2

Part 4

You are going to read an extract from a novel. For questions 34—40, choose the answer (A, B,
C or D) which you think fits best according to the text.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

T have never begun a novel with more misgiving. If I call it a novel it is only because I don’t know
what else to call it. I have little story to tell and I end neither with a death or a marriage. Instead
I leave my reader in the air. This book consists of my recollections of a man with whom I was
thrown into close contact only at long intervals, and I have little knowledge of what happened
to him in between. I suppose that by the exercise of invention I could fill the gaps plausibly enough
and so make my narrative more coherent; but I have no wish to do that. I only want to set down
what I know.

To save embarrassment to people still living I have given to the persons who play a part in this
story names of my own contriving, and I have in other ways taken pains to make sure that no
one should recognise them. The man I am writing about is not famous. It may be that he never
will be. It may be that when his life at last comes to an end he will leave no more trace of his
sojourn on earth than a stone thrown into a river leaves on the surface of the water. Then my
book, if it is read at all, will be read only for what intrinsic interest it may possess. But it may be
that the way of life that he has chosen for himself and the peculiar strength and sweetness of his
character may have an ever-growing influence over his fellow men so that, long after his death
perhaps, it may be realised that there lived in this age a very remarkable creature. Then it will be
quite clear of whom I write in this book and those who want to know at least a little about his
early life may find in it something to their purpose. I think my book, within its acknowledged
limitations, will be a useful source of information to my friend’s biographers.

I do not pretend that the conversations I have recorded can be regarded as verbatim reports.
I never kept notes of what was said on this or the other occasions, but I have a good memory for
what concerns me, and though I have put these conversations in my own words they faithfully
represent, I believe, what was said. I remarked a little while back that I have invented nothing
but I have taken the liberty that historians have taken to put into the mouths of the persons of
my narrative speeches that I did not myself hear and could not possibly have heard. I have done
this for the same reasons that the historians have, to give liveliness and verisimilitude to scenes
that would have been ineffective if they had been merely recounted. I want to be read and I think
I am justified in doing what I can to make my book readable. The intelligent reader will easily
see for himself where I have used this artifice, and he is at perfect liberty to reject it.

Another reason that has caused me to embark upon this work with apprehension is that the
persons [ have chiefly to deal with are of another culture. It is very difficult to know people and
I don’t think one can ever really know any but one’s own countrymen. For men and women are
not only themselves; they are also the region in which they were born, the city apartment or the
farm in which they learnt to walk, the games they played as children, the food they ate, the schools
they attended, the sports they followed and the poets they read. It is all these things that have
made them what they are, and these are the things that you can’t come to know by hearsay, you
can only know them if you have lived them. You can only know if you are them. And because
you cannot know persons of a nation foreign to you except from observation, it is difficult to
give them credibility in the pages of a book. I have never attempted to deal with any but my own
countrymen, and if I have ventured to do otherwise in short stories it is because in them you can
treat your characters more summarily. You give the reader broad indications and leave him to
fill in the details. In this book, I do not pretend that my characters are as they would see
themselves; they are seen, as is my main character, through my own eyes.

38


=== Page 44 ===

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

Paper 1 Reading

In the first paragraph, the author reveals that he

A_is dissatisfied with the conclusion of his novel.

B has superficial understanding of his main character.

Chas resisted employing certain literary techniques.

Dis disapproving of mainstream fiction writing.

In discussing the identity of the characters in the novel, the author shows his
A_ respect for historical fact.

B _ sensitivity towards others.

C_ awareness of stylistic conventions.

D_ understanding of human relationships. ;
What does the author suggest about his main character in paragraph 2?

A_ His appeal to the reader is difficult to predict.

B_ The role he plays is likely to be controversial.

C_ The choices he makes are rather conventional.

D_ His approach to life reflects the era in which he lived.

In discussing the dialogue in the novel, the author states that it
A involves some distortion of the facts.

B_ contains some obvious literary embellishments.

C_ can be trusted to reflect the spirit of the age.

D_ has been re-worked to fit the style of the novel.

\n the third paragraph, while expanding on his inventiveness as a writer, the author
A denies an influence on his work.

B_ supports an earlier statement that he made.

C corrects a false assumption about his style.

D_ defends the technique he has used in the novel.

The author’s tone in discussing culture in the final paragraph is

A accusatory.

B_ embarrassed.

C_ explanatory.

D ambivalent.

In the extract, the writer makes it clear that this novel
A_ will benefit a certain type of reader.

B successfully combines fact and fiction.

C may contain some inaccurate claims.

Dis untypical of his work in general.

39


=== Page 45 ===

Test 2
PAPER 2. WRITING (2 hours)

Part 1

You must answer this question. Write your answer in 300-350 words in an appropriate style.

1 You have attended a course on ‘Computing in the 21* Century’ and have been asked by your
tutor to write an essay on the future role of computers in education. You have been to a
lecture on this subject and have made the notes below. You write your essay using your
notes and expressing your own opinions.

old-fashioned and out-dated? needed?

unnecessary? help motivation?

classroom teachers

computing in
education

learning

best done alone or flexibility ;
with others? (e.g. you decide when, where, how)

Write your essay.

40


=== Page 46 ===

Paper 2 Writing

Part 2

Write an answer to one of the questions 2—5 in this part. Write your answer in 300-350 words in
an appropriate style.

2 Your college has been given funding to improve its leisure and sports facilities for students. The
college principal has asked people to send in proposals on how the money can be best spent.
In your proposal comment on the present facilities, and make recommendations for improving
and extending them.
Write your proposal.

3 Your local tourist office has launched a competition to encourage people to eat out more often
at local restaurants. To win the prize, a holiday weekend, you must write a review of a visit to
a restaurant of your choice to celebrate a special occasion. Describe the interior, the food and
the service, and say whether you would recommend the restaurant and why.
Write your review.

4 A radio programme is running a competition to find the ‘Personality of the Decade’. Listeners
wishing to nominate a personality are asked to write letters to the radio station giving details of
the individual they have chosen and explaining why they think this person should win the title.
The person should be well-known and should have made a significant contribution in their
particular field during the past ten years.

Write your letter. Do not write any postal addresses.

5 Based on your reading of one of these books, write on one of the following.

(a) Anne Tyler: The Accidental Tourist

A series of articles has been looking at the treatment of unconventional lifestyles in modern
literature. Readers have been asked to send in contributions. You write an article in which you
describe the Leary household and compare it with Muriel’s home in Singleton Street, and say
how Macon adapts to each one.

Write your article.

(b) John Wyndham: The Day of the Triffids

The Editor of the Arts Page of a newspaper has asked for letters on what kind of books make
good films. Write a letter saying why you think The Day of the Triffids would make a successful
science fiction film, making particular reference to how different characters respond to fear of
the unknown.

Write your letter. Do not write any postal addresses.

(c) Granam Greene: Our Man in Havana

A magazine is running a series of articles on likeable villains in English literature. You have
recently read Our Man in Havana and decide to write an article for this series. In your articie
you should describe Captain Segura’s character, and refer to the aspects of his behaviour and
actions which led Mr Wormold to say of him ‘he wasn’t a bad chap’.

Write your article.

41


=== Page 47 ===

Test 2
PAPER 3 USE OF ENGLISH (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1

For questions 1-15, read the text below and think of the word which best fits each space. Use only
one word in each space. There is an example at the beginning (0).

Write your answers in CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet.

Example: | 0 HIJA S| | | | |

GARDEN WILDLIFE

The age of a garden (0) ....'4%.... a great effect on the abundance of its wildlife. Since most animals
depend ultimately on plants for their food, animal life cannot easily establish (1) ............... in the
absence of plant life. A plot of land behind a newly-built house, even (2) ............... covered with a
layer of good soil, will support very (3) ............ resident species other (4) ..........0.. microscopic
organisms. (5) ..........05 from the odd worm or spider, not (6) ............... creatures will be able to
(7) ceecceecesceee a living in the garden (8) .............. this stage.

Colonisation takes (9) ........0... gradually. Humans may introduce plants, and weed seeds will
arrive on the breeze or be dropped by passing birds. Insects and other animals visit the garden
and, given suitable conditions, they take (10) ............... residence there. (11)... all this

activity, however, it takes years for a garden to become fully populated, and it cannot really

be regarded as mature until it is (12) 0.0000. of supporting fully-grown shrubs and trees. On
(13) oo basis, a large number of British gardens are immature, (14) ............... as much as
they do not support (15) oo... a variety of wildlife as an older garden.

42


=== Page 48 ===

Paper 3 Use of English

Part 2

For questions 16-25, read the text below. Use the word given in capitals at the end of some
of the lines to form a word that fits in the space in the same line. There is an example at the

beginning (0). ‘

Write your answers in CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet.

A

P[R

aE

BIL

Example: | 0

YELL ET TT LLe

LANGUAGE CHANGE

The phenomenon of language change (0) .P'0?40ly. attracts more public notice

and more (16) than any other linguistic issue. There is a widely held

belief that change must mean deterioration and decay. Older people observe
the casual speech of the young and conclude that standards have fallen

(17) oe .
It is understandable that many people dislike change, but it is (18) ............. to
condemn all linguistic (19) ............... . Itis often felt that contemporary language

illustrates the problem at its worst, but this belief is shared by every generation.

There are indeed cases where linguistic change can lead to problems of

unintelligibility and (20) , and if change is too rapid there can be

major communication problems. But as a rule, the parts of language which are
seeseeeeeeeenes change at any given time are relatively small in comparison to

the vast, unchanging areas of language. It is because change is so (22)
that it is so distinctive and (23) ..

... Some degree of caution and

concern is therefore always desirable for the (24) of precision and

communication, but there are no grounds for the extremely

pessimistic attitudes so often encountered.

PROBABLE
DISAPPROVE

APPRECIATE

WISE
MODIFY

AMBIGUOUS

Go
FREQUENT
NOTICE
MAINTAIN
EFFECT

43


=== Page 49 ===

Test 2

Fol

Part 3

questions 26-31, think of one word only which can be used appropriately in all three sentences.

Here is an example (0).

!

Example:

0

Some of the tourists are hoping to get compensation for the poor state of the hotel, and | think
they have a VETY oo. case.

There’s no point in trying to wade across the river, the current is far too ceveseseaceceuecesueenssensentetees«

If you’re asking me which of the candidates should get the job, I’m afraid | don’t have any
sevsseseeassnsneatanesesesesesseeeas views either way.

[olis[*fefotsfel TTT TT TT TET TT

Write only the missing word in CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet.

26

27

A key witness can often provide detailed corroboration, thus having a dramatic
seeseasasseaeatecevevevarereteeeeee on the outcome of a complex legal case.

H's generally agreed that the .... ... Of television in the modern world is
considerable.

Martha Graham played a major role in developing the theory of modern dance, so
extending NeM ou. eeeeeneseeeeeees to a whole new generation of dancers.

My boss is extremely efficient, but unfortunately she’s not alWAYS VETY .......cseseeseseeeseesseees
to other people’s worries.

In the play, James Collard gave a ..... .. portrayal of the artist as a young man.

My brother was always an extreMely 0... esseseesesteeeeeeee child, and we had to be very
careful what we said to him.

28 Paul Smith has always been totally... cseeeseeeseeees to helping others less fortunate
than himself.
Annna’s absolutely oo... ceeeesestseeenesees to her career as a surgeon; nothing else is really

important to her.

The singer George Andrew has
wife.

.... Several of his most recent songs to his

44


=== Page 50 ===

29

30

31

Paper 3 Use of English

Any new decisions the committee takes MUSt De IN oe eeeceeeeeteseeenees with previous
policy.

If Simon is going to take that 0... eeeeeeeeeeeeee , | don’t think he will persuade anyone.
George reached the edge of the field and caught Sight Of ao... cesses of trees in

the distance.

Sarah felt great occ when she heard about the accident.
The conference catering arrangements are not Mrs RObinSon’s ...........eeeseeeeeeeeeeeee :

The new printing company my uncle established is NOW @ thriVIN ........ css eeeeeeee .

JOHN NAS Great serene in his mechanic’s ability to get the car going.

My father is usually successful in interviews owing to his air of ....

Susan has never betrayed a ou... cece and | don’t think she ever will.

45—


=== Page 51 ===

Test 2

Part 4

For questions 32-39, complete the second sentence so that it has a similar meaning to the first
sentence, using the word given. Do not change the word given. You must use between three
and eight words, including the word given.

Here is an example (0).

Example:
0 Do you mind if | watch you while you paint?
objection

DO YOU ooeeeeeecceccececeeeseseeeeseeceeseeececseencacetenesesaceesesesneansasseseceeeueaeseeseeeeeeetens you while you paint?

0 have any objection to my watching

Write only the missing words on the separate answer sheet.

32 Only passengers with Gold Star tickets may use the executive lounge.
restricted
Use of the executive lounge ou... cc eceeecesseseeeseseereeeneeeeneensquestsensnestsenestseneneeaneneatentenieee
possession of Gold Star tickets.

33 You should not lock this door for any reason when the building is open to the public.
circumstances
IN) oo eececeeeeeeeneereeeseceesenesecsesveneaveseseenessseneceseserenseeresersneesireneneanes locked when the building is
open to the public.

34 Helen was always embarrassed by her father’s jokes.
source

. her.

Helen’s father’s jokes ....

46


=== Page 52 ===

35

36

37

38

39

~ Paper 3 Use of English

How likely is the new venture to get off the ground?
prospects

What oo eccsccesenesestesestetcsesecusseseseesnsnesesaseesnenesecseaeeseaeensneansneneseeaeatenee off the ground?

Damien paid little attention to his brother’s warnings.

notice

Damien didn’t oe. ceseseeesesscenesesssesecencneesvaneenveneensenesenenesecanensseeasentes his brother’s
warnings.

In Colin’s opinion, he hasn’t done anything he should apologise for.

concerned

AGS. oeeccecceseseesesessesesenesecscseseeacesneaneecauenenesersesesneaeeneneneeueieseeaeeneneneeeseneee , he hasn't done anything he
should apologise for.

Dr Potter was offended by some of the remarks that were made about her work.
exception

Dr Potter ..... uutssnsnsnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnntane some of the remarks
that were made about her work.

She had her own reasons for not telling us anything about her past.

dark

As to her past, she kept us .
reasons.

47


=== Page 53 ===

Test 2

Part 5
For questions 40—44, read the following texts about the constraints of modern life. For questions
40-43, answer with a word or short phrase. You do not need to write complete sentences. For

question 44, write a summary according to the instructions given.

Write your answers to questions 40-44 on the separate answer sheet.

Because man’s original need to hunt in order to survive has all but disappeared, we

are now free to replace it with whatever symbolic substitution takes our fancy, just

so long as it contains some of the basic elements. Today, for most people, ‘going to
work’ is the major substitute for hunting. For the lucky ones, the nature of their daily

work is sufficiently close to the pattern of the primeval hunt to be satisfying. The
executives who set off in the morning, eager to make a ‘killing’ in the city, with their
schemes and strategies, their team tactics and targets, their immediate aims

and long-term goals, hoping to confirm a contract or close a deal, and eventually to
‘bring home the bacon’, are the fulfilled pseudo-hunters of modern times. But for tine 9
many other people, their work is so boringly repetitive that it provides little of the
challenge of the hunt and is a poor substitute for it. If we were descendants of
cud-chewing herbivores, this would not matter, but we are not. People whose work line 12
is boring become restless and frustrated. They have to find other outlets for their
‘hunter’s brain’. Some of these outlets are creative. Others can be highly destructive.

For many individuals, a lack of ‘job satisfaction’, which can usually be traced to a

lack of potential for symbolic hunting, is only made tolerable by the development of
some kind of hobby or private passion.

40 Why is the phrase ‘bring home the bacon’ (line 9) particularly appropriate?

41 In your own words, explain why repetitive work would not be a problem for descendants of
‘cud-chewing herbivores’ (line 12).

48


=== Page 54 ===

42

43

44

Paper 3 Use of English

Biologically, human beings are aroused by the amount of stimulation around them and
the modern city is full of sights that trigger psychological arousal. When we walk
through cities we are bombarded by stimuli of all types. Imagine walking into a busy
street with the noise of people, cars and roadworks. The sounds may be unpleasant
but still stimulate us. Adrenalin pumps through our body, making us react more
quickly than normal; our heart rate increases the blood flow to our muscles, enabling
us to break quickly into a run to catch a bus. Our heightened arousal means that we
can react quickly.

Although this can be useful, there is a limit to how much our senses can take in at
once. When we step off a train at a busy station after a relatively quiet journey, our
senses are bombarded. There is simply too much noise and too much happening for
our brain to process. We're overloaded. The general level of arousal in the busy
station may enable us to attend to more of the stimuli, but we still have to ignore
some of what is happening, as we do not have the capacity to deal with everything:
it is as if we have tunnel vision.

City life consists of a huge number of encounters with potential .sensory and
information overload. The necessary filtering out of some of these stimuli has been
institutionalised into new rules of behaviour for the city. People don’t stop and talk,
they keep their faces blank and their eyes straight ahead. They are not just protecting
themselves, but avoiding overloading others.

What does the writer mean by ‘tunnel vision’ (line 15)?

Explain why, according to the writer, it is necessary to filter out ‘some of these stimuli’
(line 17) in modern city life?

line 15

line 17

In a paragraph of between 50 and 70 words, summarise in your own words as far as

possible how, according to the texts, human beings respond to life in modern society.

your summary on the separate answer sheet.

Write

49


=== Page 55 ===

Test 2
PAPER 4 LISTENING (40 minutes approximately)

Part 1

You will hear four different extracts. For questions 1-8, choose the answer (A, B or C) which fits

best according to what you hear. There are two questions for each extract.

Extract 1

You hear part of a radio interview about an amusement park and its founder.

1 Why does Ray Taylor say he only goes on some rides once?

A to indicate how busy he is
B_ to show he has checked them all
C_ to make them seem exciting

2 Charles Wicksteed’s job was

A running the park.
B_ managing an engineering company.
C_ inventing machines.

Extract 2

You hear a rock musician speaking about his early life.

3 What made the speaker, as a child, interested in his father’s hobby?

A_ It seemed rather mysterious and scary.
Bit was his only chance to listen to the radio.
C_ tt opened the outside world up to him.

4 How did he feel when he first heard his record on the radio?

A overjoyed
B_ shocked
C embarrassed

50



=== Page 56 ===

Paper 4 Listening

You hear a radio announcement telling listeners about an arts programme later in the evening.

5 The subject of tonight's programme is
A anew theatrical production.
B_actors in film and theatre. [8]
C_ the analysis of one type of play.

6 Rowntree has chosen a new area of work because
A_ he enjoys theatre work so much.
B_ he wants to have an overview of theatre. | ls
Che is getting too old to be a director.

You hear a speaker talking about a medicine called ‘PROKAZ’ and how she chose its name.

7 The speaker said she wanted to choose a name that
A could be used in many different languages.
B_ would suggest the qualities of the product. | fz]
C_ would be easy to remember.

8 ‘KAZ’ was chosen as part of the name ‘PROKAZ’ because

A modern scientists used these letters.
Bit already existed. ' 8
C_ it sounded progressive.



=== Page 57 ===

Test 2

Part 2

You will hear the beginning of an interview in which a university professor talks about the robot he has
designed, called Jeremy. For questions 9-17, complete the sentences with a word or short phrase.

In the trials, Jeremy had to find his way round a complicated

9 | without problems.

Professor Shepherd mentions .
| 10 | as a possibly dangerous
2...) Substance that robots can deal with.

He believes that making robots will help researchers to understand

| 11 | itself.

Researchers decided to use the model of ants, whose

| 12 | are adequate for their needs.

In appearance, Jeremy most resembles a E | on wheels.
Jeremy has a 14 | attached on top of him.

Professor Shepherd compares giving Jeremy rewards and punishments with

E

Professor Shepherd describes his use of the terms ‘reward’ and ‘punishment’ as a kind of

| 16

He gives the example of a robotic

| 17 | to show how far domestic robots have developed.

52


=== Page 58 ===

Paper 4 Listening

Part 3

You will hear an interview with Or Janet Thompson, who spent many years in Africa observing
chimpanzees. For questions 18-22, choose the answer (A, B, C or D) which fits best according
to what you hear.

18 When Dr Thompson first saw a chimpanzee using a blade of grass as a tool,

19

20

21

22

oOoOW>

it made her feel much closer to the animal.

it confirmed one of her theories.
it fulfilled her expectations.

it had no initial impact on her.

Dr Thompson was not worried about her personal safety while in Africa because

0oONu>

wild animals tend to avoid conflict with humans.

she had never been hurt by an animal. . | 19
the potentially dangerous chimpanzees knew her well.

she was able to avoid the wild animals.

According to Dr Thompson, the only disadvantage of bringing up her son in Gombe was

>

B
c
D

the lack of expert medical services in case of illness.
the risk of drowning in the lake.

the danger of attack by a wild animal.

the fact that there were no other children of his age.

20

Dr Thompson corrects the interviewer by explaining that father chimpanzees

A

B
c
D

are unlikely to take on a paternal role.
keep male intruders or rivals at a distance. eh
extend their territory for reasons of pride. :

rescue their females from danger.

Dr Thompson decided to leave Gombe and the chimpanzees because

COD >

she wanted the company of people again.

there was little more to be discovered about their habits.
she felt impelled to tell people about the problem. : \

her research needed to be taken to the next stage.

53


=== Page 59 ===

Test 2

Part 4

You will hear two friends, Kathy and Derek, talking about films based on 19" century novels. For
questions 23-28, decide whether the opinions are expressed by only one of the speakers, or
whether the speakers agree.

Write K_ for Kathy

D_ for Derek
or B_ for Both, where they agree.
23 = In the film Oliver Twist, it was hard to think of the actors as the characters 23
they were playing. _

24 Film adaptations of the 1930s and 40s reflect their own time. 24
25 Film adaptations made nowadays may reflect current attitudes. 25
26 The actor sometimes does not match your idea of the character. 26
27 The author's viewpoint should be evident in film adaptations. 27
28 The film audience are able to reach their own conclusions about the characters. 28

54



=== Page 60 ===

Paper 5 Speaking

PAPER 5 SPEAKING (19 minutes)

There are two examiners. One (the Interlocutor) conducts the test, providing you with the necessary
materials and explaining what you have to do. The other examiner (the Assessor) will be introduced
to you, but then takes no further part in the interaction.

Part 1 (3 minutes)

The Interlocutor first asks you and your partner a few questions which focus on information about
yourselves and personal opinions.

Part 2 (4 minutes)

In this part of the test you and your partner are asked to talk together. The Interlocutor places a
set of pictures on the table in front of you. This stimulus provides the basis for a discussion. The
Interlocutor first asks an introductory question which focuses on one or two of the pictures. After
about a minute, the Interlocutor gives you both a decision-making task based on the same set of
pictures.

The pictures for Part 2 are on pages C4—C5 of the colour section.

Part 3 (12 minutes)

You are each given the opportunity to talk for two minutes, to comment after your partner has
spoken and to take part in a more genera! discussion.

The Interlocutor gives you a card with a question written on it and asks you to talk about it for
two minutes. After you have spoken, your partner is first asked to comment and then the
Interlocutor asks you both another question related to the topic on the card. This procedure is
repeated, so that your partner receives a card and speaks for two minutes, you are given an
opportunity to comment and a follow-up question is asked.

Finally, the Interlocutor asks some further questions, which leads to a discussion on a general
theme related to the subjects already covered in Part 3.

The cards for Part 3 are on pages C10—C11 of the colour section.

55


=== Page 61 ===

Test 3
PAPER 1 READING (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1

For questions 1-18, read the three texts below and decide which answer (A, B, C or D). best fits
each gap. ,

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

Othello

The transfer to London from Stratford of an exceptional production of Shakespeare’s play Othello
allows me to make (1) .... for an unfair review that | wrote when the show opened last spring. Back
then | complained that Ray Fearon was too young to play the title role and | was guilty of running
down his acting. i still think it’s a distortion of the tragedy to remove the age difference between
Othello and Desdemona but | eat my (2) .... about the rest of Mr Fearon’s magnificent performance.
Indeed the whole cast is magnificent. Memorable scenes include the one where Cassio’s
competitive games with the other young officers get dangerously out of (3) ...., and the moment
when lago begins to lose control and has to struggle to get a (4) .... on himself. And | challenge
anyone not to be (5) .... to tears during the scene where Emilia prepares Desdemona for bed. The
(6) .... and tension throughout are terrific. Do not miss this production.

1 A_ confessions B amends C compensation D recourse
2 A_ thoughts B_ words C ideas D comments
3 A turn B place C reach D_ hand

4 A brake B grasp C rein D grip

5 A drawn B sent C moved D carried

6 A pace B dash C rate D haste
Lake Vostok

In the heart of Antarctica, nothing (7) ..... On the fringes of the continent there are penguins, seals
and birds aplenty. But up on the great white plateau in the interior, life has no foothold. Except,
(8) .... , in a vast hidden expanse of freshwater named Lake Vostok which lies beneath nearly

56


=== Page 62 ===

Paper 1 Reading

4 kilometres of ice, directly below the coldest (9) .... on earth. The water has been isolated from air
and sunlight for up to 25 million years. Biologists can hardly wait to (10) .... its mysterious depths
and discover what strange organisms lurk within. Geologists and glaciologists are hot on their
(11) .... . For two years now, researchers round the world have been plotting ways to uncover the
‘ake’s secrets, and, if they get their wish, in the next few years we will (12) .... the decade of Lake
Vostok.

7 A_ stalks B sstirs Cssuits D_ sounds
8 A_ that is B_ for example Cin effect D assuch
9 A tip B speck Cspot D dot

10 A burrow B_ plunge C_ tunnel D probe

11 A heels B knees C paces D steps

12 A present B_ witness C expose D_ reveal

Scientists

There was an interesting thing on the radio last week. It seems that a bunch of scientists are getting
themselves hot under the (13) .... over what drives them to be scientists; the expression ‘because
it’s there’ (14) .... to mind. Sure we all know it’s the age-old (15) .... for knowledge, the desire to
understand everything from the atom to the black hole. But what these guys want to know is why
we want to know all of this in the first (16) .... and why can’t science explain why we want to know?

Surely, it’s more important to know whether what we scientists are doing is right, rather than get
(17) .... in debates over the point of it all. | would have thought that the crucial issue here is not
why we pursue it, but to (18) .... that science is a tool, and we are the ones who should decide
_how, where, when and why to use it.

13 A_ shirt B collar C cuff D hat

14 A trips B_ bounds C_ssprings D slips

15 A mission B quest C journey - D_ expedition
16 A place B stage C step D part

17 A pulled up B dragged up C slowed down D bogged down
18 A_ identify B accommodate C distinguish D_ recognise

57


=== Page 63 ===

Test 3

Part 2

You are going to read four extracts which are all concerned in some way with people and places.
For questions 19-26, choose the answer (A, B, C or D) which you think fits best according to the

text.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

Philadelphia Avenue

| headed down Philadelphia Avenue on the odd-numbered side. The dusk had

19

20

58

deepened, the humidity thickened into a palpable, prickly drizzle that lent my walk
a heightened feeling of sheltered stealth. | knew this side of the street from the
dawn of consciousness; our neighbours the Matzes and the Pritchards, and Han
Kieffer’s grocery store, and the Krings’ and the Pottses’ houses where my first
playmates, all girls, lived. These houses down the street, though not every inhabitant
was known by name to me, had each been as distinct to my childish awareness as
the little troughs in the cement which led rain from their roof gutters out through
the sidewalk to the street, and which punctuated my progress on roller skates or
on my scooter. As the street sloped downward, there was a just-perceptible
descent in the social scale as well: the porches got lower to the ground, and the
front yards became exiguous. Over the years, there had been changes: wooden
porch banisters and pillars had been replaced by wrought iron, in a vaguely Southern
or Spanish style. Throughout Shillington, not only had houses | remembered as
homes become stores but, stranger still, stores - Pep Conrad’s up on Franklin and
Second, Han Kieffer’s here — had reverted to being homes. How had the residents
divided up those open, shelved spaces? How did they live with all those ghostly
aromas of merchandise? :

As the writer starts to walk along Philadelphia Avenue, he feels himself to be

a child again.

something of an intruder.
a long-term resident.

a professional sociologist.

0ONUPY

What is the significance of ‘the little ttoughs in the cement’ (line 8) to the writer?

They were architecturally distinctive.

They evoked early friendships.

They indicated the status of each householder.
They had once served as a measure of distance.

00uN>Y

line 8


=== Page 64 ===

21

22

Paper 1 Reading.

Bachelor Fads

Furniture designer Rick Gilbert's flat is a former curtain warehouse. It has the
conventional features of the classic loft space, in this instance, exposed brickwork
and gigantic doors, through which curtains were once hoisted from trains on the
adjacent railway track. But Gilbert was adamant that he didn’t want a brutally
empty, open-plan space — for practical as much as aesthetic reasons.

‘In my last place, living and working spaces were integrated. It was hard to switch
off or start work in full view of the living area.’

Refusing to conform to the loft-dwelling convention of open-plan living, he broke
up the space near the entrance with a giant snaking sheet of corrugated plastic. ‘It
hides the office, creates a hallway, and guides the eye to the kitchen in the middle
of the flat. I wanted the kitchen to be a neutral zone, where I can either cook dinner
for friends or make coffee for clients.’

To offset the synthetic look of his plastic screen and stainless steel kitchen, Gilbert
laid the floors with a light wood. And while his futuristic chairs and sofas litter the
flat, it’s also stuffed with rather more sentimental and homely furniture, given to
him by his parents or bought from markets.

Why does Rick Gilbert find his present accommodation more convenient than his last place?

A_Itis handy for deliveries of materiais.
B itis suitable for entertaining clients.
C_ itis easier to relax there.

Dit can be re-arranged easily.

How has Rick furnished his home?

according to artistic convention
according to his personal taste
in the style of a previous age

in line with contemporary fashion

00U>,Y

59


=== Page 65 ===

Test 3

23

24

60

Bruce Chatwin

To escape or to explore? The spur behind Bruce Chatwin’s absurdly romantic
nomadic existence has become something of a literary conundrum. Chatwin’s
life and art were strewn with secrets, subtle resonances and, it must be said,
lies. But he was, for all that, a brilliant and unique writer. His first book, In
Patagonia, published in 1977, is an awesome exercise in imagination. A travel
book that reinvented travel writing, it has the animation ofa thriller, the sparkle
of romantic fiction and the irrepressible insight of truly extraordinary literature.
Of course, even with this book, Chatwin cloaked fact with concoction; when
sketching individuals and incidents, he would adjust, if not abandon, objective
reality for the sake of a better twist to an anecdote, or a clean cut to the heart of
what the book somehow seemed to suggest — that through travel it was possible
to discover whole histories that had been lived out as if solely to excite and
fascinate future explorers. :

What point is made about the book In Patagonia?

It is impossible to classify.

It is a purely imaginary account.
It is of little value to the traveller.
It is an admirably original work.

00ND

What is the writer's purpose in this passage?

A defence of Chatwin’s failings.

An examination of Chatwin’s motives.
A reappraisal of Chatwin’s style.

A questioning of Chatwin’s integrity.

9UOUNY


=== Page 66 ===

25

26

Paper 1 Reading

Swimming

The warm rain tumbled from the gutter in one of those midsummer downpours as
I hastened across the lawn behind my house and took shelter in the pool.
Breaststroking up and down, I nosed along, eyes just at water level. Each raindrop
exploded in a momentary, bouncing fountain that turned into a bubble and burst.
The best moments were when the storm intensified, drowning birdsong, and a haze
rose off the water as though the pool itself were rising to meet the lowering sky.

It was at the height of this drenching in the summer of 1996 that the notion of a
long swim through Britain began to form itself. I wanted to follow the rain on its
meanderings about our land to rejoin the sea, to break out of the frustration of a

lifetime doing lengths, of endlessly turning back on myself like a tiger pacing its.

cage.

Most of us live in a world where more and more places and things are signposted,
labelled, and officially ‘interpreted’. There is something about all this that is turning
the reality of things into virtual reality. It is the reason why walking, cycling and
swimming will always be subversive activities. They allow us to regain a sense of
what is old and wild, by getting off the beaten track and breaking free of the official
version of things. A swimming journey would give me access to that part of our
world which, like darkness, misty woods or high mountains, still retains most

mystery.

The incident in 1996 illustrates that, to the writer, rain is a symbol of

A_ repetitive cycles.

B_ enviable freedom.
C destroyed illusions.
D_ threatening power.

Why does the writer regard swimming as a ‘subversive activity’?

It involves no equipment or technology.
It replicates an ancient skill.

It allows direct contact with nature.

It requires no official permission.

00>

¢

61


=== Page 67 ===

Test 3

Part 3

You are going to read an article about online book reviews. Seven paragraphs have been removed
from the extract. Choose from the paragraphs A-H the one which fits each gap (27-33). There is
one extra paragraph which you do not need to use.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

Online Literary Criticism For All

Do-it-yourself literary criticism: more than just harmless fun?

From the outset, the idea of open access to the
Internet was one of its guiding principles. In
theory, anyone could publish a manifesto or
broadcast a music channel on the Internet. In
practice, however, a certain amount of technical
know-how was required, at least in the early
years.

27

Amazon's egalitarian approach to book reviews
—namely, that anyone could say what they liked
about anything and award it up to five stars —
looked, on the face of it, a brilliant idea. Each
book had its own page on Amazon’s site, and
whenever a reader submitted a new review, it
appeared automatically.

28

Other online bookstores which also operated
as large bricks-and-mortar bookshop chains
provided similar features. But as the largest
player, with over 80% of the online market,
Amazon initially had the most customers,
attracted by far the greatest number of reviews
and, accordingly, encountered the most funny
business.

E

Single-word reviews, for instance, or personal
attacks on the author, were not allowed. Nor
were reviews that contained obscenities, gave

62

away the ending, or referred to other reviews.
Ultimately, however, the reviewers were
anonymous (they were not required to give their
real names) and offending reviews were
removed only if Amazon checkers noticed them.
So there was plenty of scope for mischief.

30

Authors were, in fact, provided with their own
way to hold forth: by clicking on a link marked ‘T
am the Author, and | wish to comment on my
book.’ Most authors who used this feature
posted jolly messages expressing their desire
that browsers would buy, and enjoy, the book
in question. A few even gave their email
addresses, thus inviting readers to communicate
directly. Yet authors who posted messages
knew that while Amazon did vet them, it did not
check that they really came from the author.

[=| dt

Still, the fur really began to fly as a result of
postings from readers, not writers. When James
McElroy’s We’ve Got Spirit, which documented
a year in the life of a small-town cheerleading

* team, was published, it was well received by the

mainstream press. But many of the people
mentioned in it felt betrayed, and the book’s
page on Amazon was an obvious outlet for their
anger. Dozens of highly critical reviews were
submitted — only to vanish a few days later.


=== Page 68 ===

[=| |

This meant that the best place to post a silly
review was on a page devoted to a less well-
known book. The Story about Ping, a classic
children’s work that tells the story of a duck
called Ping, was the inspiration for much geek
humour, because ‘ping’ also happened to be the
name of a software utility used to measure
the degree of congestion on the Internet.
One lengthy review constructed an elaborate
analogy between the book’s plot and the

Paper 1 Reading

architecture of the Internet, and concluded that
the book provided a ‘good high-level overview’

of basic networking concepts.

The writer George Orwell once complained that
‘reviewing too many books involved constantly
inventing reactions towards books about which
one has no spontaneous feelings whatever’.
All the more reason, then, to regard the
democratisation of the process as a good thing.

[=]

A Despite this episode, as far as Amazon was
concerned, the fact that so many people
were prepared to invest so much time
reading and writing reviews was simply good
for business. As readers’ reviews were
supposed to be a ‘forum to talk about a book’
rather than a chat room, a particularly close
eye was kept on bestselling books, to ensure
that all reviews played by the rules.

B One result was that some authors decided in
future to extend their communication with
their readership, by posting a taster of their
next novel — or even serialising it. Though at
that point, they realised they wanted to
receive something more tangible than a
review in return.

C However, there was at least one field,
previously restricted to the few, that was
genuinely opened up to the masses. By
visiting the pages of Amazon.com, the first
popular online bookshop, anyone was able
to try their hand at literary criticism.

D For this critical free-for-all lent itself to
subversion of various subtle and not-so-
subtle kinds. Thousands of reviews were
submitted each day — Amazon would not say
exactly how many ~ so it was impractical to
vet them all. Instead, a team of editors
scoured the site, checking that reviews
conformed to the company’s guidelines.

E Such silliness was, however, the exception
rather than the rule. The striking thing about
the vast majority of reader reviews at
Amazon.com was how seriously their contri-
butors took them. And overall the reviews
collectively provided a remarkably accurate
indication of whether or not a particular set
of goods was worth buying.

_F_ Anexception to this was made in the case of

big names. A little-known writer submitted an
author's comment, purporting to be from
John Updike, in which he admitted to being
a ‘talented but ultimately over-hyped
middlebrow author’. Unsurprisingly, it was
deemed a fake and was removed.

G For example, there was nothing to stop
writers giving their own books glowing
reviews. One writer, Lev Grossman, was so
mortified by the bad reviews that readers
gave his first novel (‘infantile trash’, ‘puerile -
pap’) that he submitted several anonymous
ones of his own (‘hilarious’, ‘fabulous’) to
redress the balance. His ruse succeeded until
he wrote an article detailing his deception.
The fake reviews were promptly removed.

H_ This meant that Amazon got to fill its pages
with free reviews, and potential buyers of a
book could see what other readers thought
of it, for better or worse, rather than reading
just the blurb from the publisher and the >
views of professional critics.

63


=== Page 69 ===

Test 3

Part 4

You are going to read an extract from a book on photography. For questions 34—40, choose the
answer (A, B, C or D) which you think fits best according to the text.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

Photography

Over the past one and a half centuries, photography has been used to record all aspects of
human life and activity. During this relatively short history, the medium has expanded its
capabilities in the recording of time and space, thus allowing human vision to be able to
view the fleeting moment or to visualise both the vast and the minuscule. It has brought us
images from remote areas of the world, distant parts of the solar system, as well as the
social complexities and crises of modern life. Indeed, the photographic medium has
provided one of the most important and influential means of expressing the human
condition.

Nonetheless, the recording of events by means of the visual image has a much longer
history. The earliest creations of pictorial recording go as far back as the Upper Palaeolithic
period of about 35,000 years ago. And although we cannot be sure of the exact purposes
of the early cave paintings — whether they record the ‘actual’ events of hunting, whether
they functioned as sympathetic magic to encourage the increase of animals for hunting,
whether they had a role as religious icons, or if they were made simply to enliven and
brighten domestic activities — pictorial images seem to be inextricably linked to human
culture as we understand it.

Throughout the history of visual representation, questions have been raised concerning
the supposed accuracy (or otherwise) of the visual image, as well as its status in society.
The popular notion that ‘seeing is believing’ had always afforded special status to the visual
image. So when the technology was invented, in the form of photography, the social and
cultural impact was immense.

In the mid-nineteenth century, the invention of photography appeared to offer the
promise of ‘automatically’ providing a truthful visual record. It was seen not only as the
culmination of Western visual representation but, quite simply, the camera, functioning in
much the same way as the human eye, was regarded as a machine which could provide a
fixed image. And this image was considered to be a very close approximation to that which
we actually see. The chemical fixing of the image enabled the capture of what might be
considered a natural phenomenon: the camera image. At the same time, the photographic
image was held to be an achievement of sophisticated culture and produced the type of
image that artists had struggled throughout the centuries to acquire the manual, visual and
conceptual skills to create.

It may seem a further irony that, because of the camera’s perceived realism in its ability
to replicate visual perception, it was assumed that all peoples would ‘naturally’ be able to
understand photographs. This gave rise to the question of whether photography constituted
a ‘universal language’. For example, in 1933 this view had been expressed in a series of
radio broadcasts by photographer August Sander: ‘Even the most isolated Bushman could
understand a photograph of the heavens — whether it showed the sun and moon or the

64


=== Page 70 ===

Paper1 Reading

constellations.” However, in the face of the rapid increase in global communications which
characterised the latter part of the twentieth century, we do at least need to ask to what
extent the photographic image can penetrate through cultural differences in understanding.
Or is photography as bound by cultural conventions as any other form of communication,
such as language?

Is it possible that our familiarity with the photographic image has bred our current
contempt for the intricacies and subtle methods that characterise the medium’s ability to
transmit its vivid impressions of ‘reality’? Photography is regarded quite naturally as
offering such convincing forms of pictorial evidence that this process of communication
often seems to render the medium totally transparent, blurring the distinction between our
perception of the environment and its photographic representations. It is the most natural
thing in the world for someone to open their wallet and produce a photograph saying ‘this
is my grandson’.

Ever since its invention in 1839, the technology of photography and the attitudes
towards the medium by its practitioners have changed radically. This may partly be
attributed to photography gradually moving into what might be termed ‘mythic time’ — its
initial role as a nineteenth-century record-keeper has now moved beyond the human scale
and photographic images, once immediate and close to photographer and subject alike,
have now passed out of living memory. The passage of time has transformed the
photograph from a memory aid into an historical document, one which often reveals as
much (if not more) about the individuals and society which produced the image as it does
about its subject.

I hope to show that the camera is not merely.a mute, passive chronicler of events, and
that photography does not just passively reflect culture, but can provide the vision and
impetus that promote social and political change and development. For example, it is
difficult to imagine the cultural changes of the Italian Renaissance of the fifteenth century
without recognising the central role of the development of perspective in bringing about
new visual means of representation. Similarly, photography has made a major contribution
to the bringing about of the media culture that characterises our own era, while at the same
time it has assumed the ironic role of bringing the harsh realities of the world to the coffee-
table.

34 According to the writer, how has photography contributed to our lives?

A It alters the course of significant events.

Blt enables us to see humanity in a more imaginative way.
Cit offers us a wide-ranging perspective.

Ds Itinfluences other technological developments.

35 The writer uses the example of the Upper Palaeolithic period to underline

A the durability of pictorial representations.

B the continuity of artistic forms.

C the original function of decorative art.

D the fundamental significance of visual images.

65


=== Page 71 ===

Test 3

36

37

38

39

40

66

In the mid-nineteenth century, the camera succeeded in

acquiring scientific status.

winning over a sceptical! public.
showing reality with a new accuracy.
invalidating the work of artists.

~ ee

What does the writer question in paragraph 5?

A_ The universal accessibility of photographic images.

B_ The effect of photography on language.

C_ The artistic value of photography in a changing world.
D_ The role of the photographer in interpreting images.

What point is the writer making about present-day photography in paragraph 6?

A We find it over-complicated.

B_ Weare apt to confuse it with reality.

C_ It makes us insensitive to our surroundings.

D It is insubstantial compared to other art forms.

In what sense have some photographs moved into ‘mythic time’?

A They have grown indistinct with age.

B_ They lack supporting documentary information.

C They no longer serve as an accurate record.

D_ They are obsolete in terms of their original purpose.

In comparing the Italian Renaissance to today’s ‘media culture’, the writer shows photography
as

a social mirror.

a dynamic force.

an instrument of satire.
an essential record.

900 >


=== Page 72 ===

Paper 2 Writing

PAPER 2. WRITING (2 hours)

Part 1

You must answer this question. Write your answer in 300-350 words in an appropriate style.

1 The extract below comes from an article which you have read in a magazine called Society
Today. You have strong feelings about the content of the article, and decide to write a letter
to the Editor in which you respond to the points made and express your own views.

Sa rr ee ne
Popular culture — which_includes the media, sport and the
fashion industry — places great emphasis on the importance of
image and appearance. This influence is producing a generation
of people who are superficial, self-centred and materialistic.

Write your letter. Do not write any postal addresses.

67


=== Page 73 ===

Test 3

Part 2

Write an answer to one of the questions 2—5 in this part. Write your answer in 300-350 words in an
appropriate style.

2 The Arts Section of a national daily newspaper is doing a series of reviews on children’s fiction.
You decide to submit a review of ONE children’s novel or collection of stories you read during
childhood. !n your review you should explain why your chosen work had such a strong impact
on you, and comment on whether it would appeal to children today.

Write your review.

3 The History Magazine is planning to run a series of articles called ‘Life in the Past’. The Editor
has asked for contributions which will give an idea of what it was like to live in the past. You
decide to send in an article, describing the period you would have liked to live in and giving
reasons why.

Write your article.

4 The committee of your local sports club has decided to produce a special newsletter designed
to attract new members. You have been asked to write a report of the past year’s activities
covering such aspects as training sessions, matches and competitions, and social events. You
should mention future plans and encourage those interested to come along and find out more.
Write your report.

5 Based on your reading of one of these books, write on one of the following.

(a) Anne Tyler: The Accidental Tourist

Muriel is described as unpredictable, extreme and sometimes unlikeable. Write an essay for
your tutor in which you discuss why, in view of this description of Muriel, Macon decides to go
back to her at the end of The Accidental Tourist.

Write your essay.

(b) John Wyndham: The Day of the Triffids

A magazine is producing a series of articles entitled ‘Everybody likes a story with a happy
ending’. You decide to send in a review of The Day of the Triffids, outlining the difficulties facing
Josella and Bill, and discussing whether you think the book could be described as having a
happy ending or not.

Write your review.

(c) Graham Greene: Our Man in Havana

The Drama Department at your college is going to produce a stage version of Our Man in
Havana, and has been discussing whether or not Hawthorne and the Chief should be portrayed
in a serious light. The producer has asked you to write a report on whether or not these two-
characters are intended to be taken seriously. :
Write your report.

68


=== Page 74 ===

Paper 3 Use of English
PAPER 3 USE OF ENGLISH (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1

For questions 1-15, read the text below and think of the word which best fits each space. Use only
one word in each space. There is an example at the beginning (0).

Write your answers in CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet.

RELAXATION

True relaxation is most certainly (0) Ot. a matter of flopping down in front of the television
with a welcome drink. Nor is it about drifting (1) ........... an exhausted sieep. Useful though these
responses to tension and over-tiredness (2) .............. be, we should distinguish between them and
conscious relaxation in (3) ............. of quality and effect. (4)... of the level of tiredness, real

69


=== Page 75 ===

Test 3

Part 2
For questions 16-25, read the text below. Use the word given in capitals at the end of some of
the lines to form a word that fits in the space in the same line. There is an example at the

beginning (0).

Write your answers in CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet.

Example: [o|/P]R[ATC|T]i[cjaley | [| ae

THE CONTINUING POPULARITY OF THE FOUNTAIN PEN

The fountain pen is still.a very attractive and (0) practical object, even in PRACTICE
these days of cheap, (16) .............. ball-point and felt-tip pens. Few owners are DISPOSE
(17) oe to it. Emotions range from a casual attraction to absolute passion. DIFFER
However, though the reasons for such profound (18) ............ to the pen are ATTACH
many, the way people feel is universal.

What exactly is it then about this small (19) ............... object that provokes such CYLINDER
(20) wo. of feeling? The most likely answer to this question is that INTENSE
(21) oe , the fountain pen is far more than a mere writing instrument. Itis BASE
often seen as an (22) ........... of the owner’s social standing. For some, the ASSERT
ornamentation is where its (23) ............... attraction lies. It can be adorned with DOUBT

gold, with diamonds or inlaid with floral or geometric designs.

A fountain pen should only be loaned out in (24) ............... circumstances, since EXCEPT
in no time at all it will be altered by the second user’s hand. This is one of the
(25) wee characteristics of the instrument, which makes each one unique DISTINCT

and personal to its owner.

70


=== Page 76 ===

Fol

Paper 3 Use of English

Part 3

r questions 26~31, think of one word only which can be used appropriately in all three sentences.

Here is an example (0).

Example:

0

Some of the tourists are hoping to get compensation for the poor state of the hotel, and | think
they have a VEPY ou... eee case.

There’s no point in trying to wade across the river, the current is far tOO 0... csceceeeeeereeee .

If you’re asking me which of the candidates should get the job, I’m afraid | don’t have any
seeaeavaeeeeeneeetseeserseseneenes views either way.

D
A
vA)

osteo TT ETT TT ITT

Write only the missing word in CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet.

26 I’m sure Tom will take all these points into .............. we .. before he makes a decision.
Paul gave us an interesting 0.0... eeeeeerereereees of his trip when he returned.
Alison regretted having taken so much trouble on Basil’s ....... ce eeeseeeeeeeeneeee .

27 Despite strong opposition, our local football team has Managed to... .ceeeeeeeeeseeeeteeee their

position at the top of their league.

SOME People oes the belief that the best parents are those that give their
children the freedom to make their own choices. :

The Town Council has arranged to oo. cseseseeteeneneeees a public meeting next week.

28 Buying books over the internet has changed the .......... cee of the bookselling

world completely.

James laid the playing Cards wees down on the table and stared hard at his
opponent.

The climbers decided to tackle the more challenging SOUtH ......... eects terete of the
mountain.

71


=== Page 77 ===

Test 3

29

30

31

72

Could you give ME @ VETY oe eeeeeeeseeeseenenees idea of what the building work would cost?
It was an extremely ....... eee crossing and everyone on board the little ferry felt
apprehensive.

Thomas grew up in a rather ..
friends.

.. part of Melchester and had some dubious

Most companies Will... ccc ssceeeeeeeeeee reasonable travelling expenses, provided that
receipts are kept.

Villages are often established where two rivers 00.0.0... eee seseeeeseeee , because this offers
their inhabitants ideal conditions for trade.

With rapid developments in genetics, the sports world Will SOON 0... eseseesteseereneee new
challenges, as athletes use this technology to enhance their performance.

The heating’s off, it’S NO... eee you're cold.
Penicillin is considered One Of the 0.0... ceeeeeeseseseesenenes drugs of modern medicine.
The children stared at the magician in absolute oo... eee as he produced a

song-bird from his hat.


=== Page 78 ===

Paper 3 Use of English

Part 4

For questions 32-39, complete the second sentence so that it has a similar meaning to the first
sentence, using the word given. Do not change the word given. You must use between three
and eight words, including the word given.

Here is an example (0).

Example:

ODO YOU eee eeeeneeeeenestecneersneesseneenrenseneeaeeneeieenesesenseattaneaneaneateateass you while you paint?

objection

(') have any objection to my watching

Write only the missing words on the separate answer sheet.

32 If only | hadn’t believed his lies!
taken

| wish .. ... by his lies!

33 The committee said there was no possibility of discussing the matter any further.
discussion

The committee said that fUrtHEr oe eceeeceseeesesesseseesssessseeesssesecessisecseeusecenesseesasatenseeseseeseeees
question.

34 The stranded climber would never have been rescued if his brother hadn’t had an ingenious
plan.

ingenuity

But oo.  saeuesesasseacucsesacacsessssssesssssesacasseseueceeacseenssesaesesseseseseaeese plan, the stranded climber
would never have been rescued.

73


=== Page 79 ===

Test 3

35

36

37

38

39

74

Alison bought the big house because she wanted to open a hotel.
view

Alison bought the Dig HOUSE 0... sesssesessecseesesesesaseepenesnsseeeneeesvsseeneeassessnsseesessesssseesneecsetees a hotel.

The writer's terse writing style contrasted sharply with his spoken language.
contrast

TNL oe eecsceeeseseseeeeesecessseeeeeneneneacarsversesnsensneasesseaeasaeanenenenensnenenensnsases the writer's spoken
language and his terse written style.

It is not very likely that Angela will be given the leading role.

chance

Angela ha ........cseesee sovevevevenenescaveneusssnenenenenenesenereoestenensnensnsasacaeananenavenanes the leading role.

When | started work | was so inexperienced that | couldn’t send a fax.

clue

Ie IC [ak ann Ove ovOuNE OSES TE SEO SED STSEESTOSEDITOSEDSTESTD STEREO SSESES SEE SEESEESESSES TEESE NOOSE TEOSTOTERTTETEN send a fax when | started
work.

it took several months for George to recover completely from his accident.

make

Only after Several MONTHS oo ese sesststsenenestseeseeseeecsscstsretscerereresuesaasssararavaseavasenesseseees his
accident.


=== Page 80 ===

Paper 3 Use of English

Part 5

For questions 40-44, read the following texts about work. For questions 40-43, answer with a
word or short phrase. You do not need to write complete sentences. For question 44, write a
summary according to the instructions given.

Write your answers to questions 40—44 on the separate answer sheet.

40

41

Be it a data entry, a deleted file or a jammed photocopier, every office is
susceptible to the occasional human hiccup. At best, mistakes are time-
consuming and costly; at worst they are fatal. Several recent disasters have been
attributed to employee oversights, a fact that has forced companies to consider
how best to handle slips and lapses. Traditionally, employers have taken a
punitive line, but a recent study has shown that it might be in the company’s
interest to embrace employees who blunder. ‘Rewarding staff for managing errors
rather than punishing them leads to a better company culture,’ says one
researcher whose work has revealed a relationship between error tolerance and
commercial success.

A psychologist who looks at human errors in work settings where safety is critical
adds: ‘If you have a work system that is error intolerant, the efficiency of an
organisation is going to be affected. If someone is in a situation where a flick of
a button means the entire contents of the computer are wiped, then that person
is likely to lead a fairly stressful life. If you can set up a system designed to be error
tolerant, you're likely to see less of the normal human psyche protection
strategies. People understandably look elsewhere for explanations when things go
wrong, but if systems are set up correctly and people know their actions will be
recoverable, they can be more innovative and express themselves in their work
without fear of getting the blame for every little thing that goes wrong.’

line 2

line 16

Which two other phrases from paragraph 1 express the same idea as ‘occasional human

hiccup’ (line 2)?

In your own words say what the writer means when she uses the phrase ‘human psyche

protection strategies’ (lines 16-17).

75


=== Page 81 ===

Test 3

42

43

44

76

Not so long ago, stressed-out executives at a failing company were packed off on a
training course. Nothing so very unusual about that, but they were in for a surprise. There
was no time management seminar, no flashy flip-charts. Instead they were faced with
cardboard, paint and glue. The day-long session required each delegate to create a mask
to represent the face they presented at work. Mask-making, it is claimed, is a very
effective corporate tool. It helps people access their intuitive, imaginative skills.

Creativity has become a highly-prized commodity, even in less-than-fizzy professions
such as accountancy. Bosses have begun to see that if you sit in a boring meeting in a
boring conference room, you will inevitably emerge with boring ideas. As companies
become desperate to harness creativity and lateral thinking, they are being forced to look
at new ways of fostering those talents. A London comedy club has launched a corporate
programme to inspire executives by teaching them to do comic routines, because
forward-looking companies realise a good atmosphere at work and good relations with
colleagues are crucial to motivating staff. Teaching them how to laugh with each other
is a good start. There are other courses that focus on humour in the belief that comedy
can help employees confront their inner fears. Says the organiser, ‘We get people to
write a story about a situation that's bothering them, then we clown it. It's not about
being funny, it's about developing self-expression.’

line 7

Explain in your own words why the training course mentioned in paragraph 1 did not match

the participants’ expectations.

What does the writer's use of the phrase ‘less-than-fizzy’ (line 7) reveal about her attitude to

accountancy?

In a paragraph of between 50 and 70 words, summarise in your own words as far as

possible the methods described in the texts which employers use to get the best out of

their staff. Write your summary on the separate answer sheet.


=== Page 82 ===

Paper 4 Listening

PAPER 4 LISTENING (40 minutes approximately)

Part 1

You will hear four different extracts. For questions 1-8, choose the answer (A, B or C) which fits
best according to what you hear. There are two questions for each extract.

You hear a radio interview with a woman who runs a fish farm in Wales.

1 The farmer says she breeds her own fish because

A_ itis important for her to be independent of suppliers.
B_ her clients require records of the fishes’ history.
C that is the most satisfying part of the process for her.

|_|
Ls]

2 Why does she say she stays in fish farming?

A_ Doing her best for her customers is satisfying.
B_ Her skills are not transferable to other businesses. | 2]

C_ She has built up an extremely profitable business.

Extract 2

You hear a novelist being interviewed about her early career.

3 How does she feel about the scarcity of women writers in literary reviews and journals?
A depressed ;
B_ unconcerned ; | [3]
C_ discouraged
4 Why does the speaker think the novel is a good vehicle for woman writers?
A The best novel writers have tended to be women.
B_ Her own attempts at drama did not meet with success. nae

C_ There is a body of recognised work by female writers.

77


=== Page 83 ===

Test 3

You hear two people talking about a character from a book.

5 The man describes the character of Inspector Rebus by

A comparing his anxieties to those of ordinary people.
B pointing out his interest in global issues.
C emphasising his problem-solving abilities.

6 According to the man, a police detective may be motivated by

Aa desire to achieve justice.
B  awish to make sense of life.
C aneed to explore his inner self.

Extract 4

You hear a music journalist talking about changes in popular youth culture in Britain.

7 According to the journalist the main role of pop music in the 1960s was

A_ to help young people be less self-conscious.
B to inspire teenage relationships.
C to facilitate the growing-up process.

8 The change in youth culture in the 1960s meant that

A_ parents acted as role models for their teenage children.
B young people gained responsibility for their lives earlier.
C_ the older generation struggled to keep their values.

78



=== Page 84 ===

Paper 4 Listening

Part 2

You will hear a lecture on the cork forests of southern Spain and Portugal. For questions 9-17,
complete the sentences with a word or short phrase.

Cork trees need earth which is 9 | to grow well.

One tree can be harvested up to a 10 | times.

The main product made from poor quality cork is "1 |

Healthy growth is primarily maintained by appropriate

of the cork tree:

[ 12

Bio-diversity in cork-growing areas is maintained by planting

13 | between the trees.

The speaker believes that the contaminant TCA is spread from the

[ 14 | of other trees.

The Cork Growers’ Association has agreed to use contaminated cork for

| L's]

Decline in the cork forests will make a 16 | of the area.

The habitat of rare animals such as the

17 | will be lost if the forests decline.

79


=== Page 85 ===

Test 3

Part 3

You will hear part of a radio programme about a group of people on an expedition to the South
Pole. For questions 18-22, choose the answer (A, B, C or D) which fits best according to what
you hear.

18 The team members do not talk to each other while they walk because they

19

20

21

22

80

A
B
c
D

This expedition is different from the one to the North Pole because it is

00a»,

“wear protective head-gear.

walk one behind the other.
use a lot of energy pulling heavily laden sledges.
find it difficult to keep momentum going.

all-female.
less rigorous.
not a relay.
shorter.

Caroline’s confidence was severely dented when

900U>P

there were tremors underneath them.

one of the team injured her shoulder.

they came across a crevasse for the first time.
one of the sledges crashed into a crevasse.

What does Caroline say about the team’s sleeping patterns?

UNMN>Y

It is not easy to sleep because it’s so cold.
They sleep soundly.

They are usually awake when the alarm rings.
They do not get enough sleep.

It is easy for Caroline to accept the other team’s success because

A

B
c
D

it was on a fund-raising expedition.
it is more experienced.

its make-up is different.

its members are their friends.



=== Page 86 ===

Paper 4 Listening

Part 4

You will hear part of a radio programme in which two people, Louise and Stephen, discuss a film ~
they have recently seen. For questions 23-28, decide whether the opinions are expressed by only
one of the speakers, or whether the speakers agree.

Write L for Louise
S$ for Stephen

“or B_ for Both, where they agree.
23 The film is a successful satire on the ‘American Dream’. , 23
24 Many of the images seem commonplace. - 24

25 Although the main topics are by no means new, they’ve been given a

different slant. 2

26 There were some truly exceptional passages in the film. 26

aa

27 The ending of the film is inconclusive. 27

oe
[=| 18]

28 In terms of pace, the film is well judged. 28

81


=== Page 87 ===

Test 3

PAPER 5 SPEAKING (19 minutes)

There are two examiners. One (the Interlocutor) conducts the test, providing you with the necessary
materials and explaining what you have to do. The other examiner (the Assessor) will be introduced
to you, but then takes no further part in the interaction.

Part 1 (3 minutes)

The Interlocutor first asks you and your partner a few questions which focus on information about
yourselves and personal opinions.

Part 2 (4 minutes)

In this part of the test you and your partner are asked to talk together. The !Interlocutor places a
set of pictures on the table in front of you. This stimulus provides the basis for a discussion. The
Interlocutor first asks an introductory question which focuses on one or two of the pictures. After
about a minute, the Interlocutor gives you both a decision-making task based on the same set of
pictures.

The pictures for Part 2 are on pages C6-C7 of the colour section.

Part 3 (12 minutes)

You are each given the opportunity to talk for two minutes, to comment after your partner has
spoken and to take part in a more general discussion. .

The Interlocutor gives you a card with a question written on it and asks you to talk about it for
two minutes. After you have spoken, your partner is first asked to comment and then the
Interlocutor asks you both another question related to the topic on the card. This procedure is
repeated, so that your partner receives a card and speaks for two minutes, you are given an
opportunity to comment and a follow-up question is asked.

Finally, the Interlocutor asks some further questions, which leads to a discussion on a general
theme related to the subjects already covered in Part 3.

The cards for Part 3 are on pages C10—-C11 of the colour section.

82


=== Page 88 ===

Test 4
PAPER 1 READING (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1

For questions 1-18, read the three texts below and decide which answer (A, B, C or D) best fits
each gap.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

Clutter

Sometimes it seems that no matter how many possessions you have, you never feel secure. While
it is reasonable to have a basic nesting instinct and create a home which (1) .... your needs, there
is a point where the motivation for acquiring things gets out of control. Modern advertising is
(2) .... deliberately designed to play on our insecurities. ‘If you don’t have one of these you will be
a (3) .... human being’ is one of the consistent (4) .... messages we receive. To discover just how
much you are influenced, | challenge you to try not to read any advertising billboards next time you
go down the street. These multi-million dollar messages (5) .... condition us in very persuasive ways
without our ever realising it. We are bombarded by them — television, radio, newspapers,
magazines, posters, tee shirts, the internet, you (6) .... it — all encouraging us to buy, buy, buy.

1 A quenches Bsstays Cc meets D_ feeds
nonetheless B- moreover C_ thereby D_ whatever

3 A_ minor B_ lesser C deeper D_ lower

4 A subdued B submerged C_ underlying D- underhand
relentlessly B fiercely C_ thoroughly D extremely

6 A label B tell Cc say D name

Caves

Research establishments and university departments around the world have (7) .... years of
research time in all aspects of caves, mainly their origins, their hydrology and their biology. Caves
constitute a small but rather mysterious (8) .... of the natural environment — as such they (9) .... our
curiosity and challenge our desire for knowledge, and consequently have had a considerable

83


=== Page 89 ===

Test 4

amount of research effort (10) .... to them. Furthermore, because of their presence as natural
phenomena, they have had a long history of study, which has been intensified in those parts of the
world where caves have had a direct effect on our way of life. However, the physical (11) ....
required to visit many caves means that cave research has been less in the hands of the learned
professors than in most other scientific fields. Indeed there is a considerable, perhaps unique,
(12) .... between the professional, scientific study of caves and the amateur studies carried out by
those who mainly visit caves for sport.

7 A conducted B_ done C_ invested D made

8 A constituent B compartment C complement D component
9 A arouse B incite Cc tempt D_ instigate
10 A_ donated B_ bestowed C devoted D lavished

11 A agility B_ capacity C properties D demands
12 A underlay B overlap C - stratification D dependence

Weather Watch

Countless observant people without any instruments other than their own senses originally (13) ....
the foundations of meteorology, which has progressed since the 17" century into the highly
technical science of today. Satellites and electronic instruments (14) .... endless weather
information to us with the minimum of delay, computers solve in minutes abstruse mathematical
sums at a speed beyond the capability of the human brain. Meteorological theory is peppered with
long words which have little (15) .... to the non-professional. It sometimes seems there is no room
left for simple weather wisdom, but nothing could be further from the (16) ..... Human experience
is still the vital ingredient which (17) .... computed data into weather forecasts. Human observations
can still provide unusual evidence which is of great help to professionals who are trying to (18) ....
the mysteries of the atmosphere.

13 A spread B made C put D laid

14 A relay B diffuse C_ share D deal

15 A purpose B evaiidity C meaning D message
16 A trust B_ honesty C truth D wisdom

17 A_ transports B translates C_ transcends D_transposes
18 Auntie B undo C unwrap D unravel

84


=== Page 90 ===

Paper1 Reading

Part 2

You are going to read four extracts which are all concerned in surne way with fine art. For questions
19-26, choose the answer (A, B, C or D) which you think fits best according to the text.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

19

20

Art

In modern times — more and more over the course of the last two hundred years —
we have come to speak as though every artist had to rebel against the art of his
contemporaries. Art is praised in terms of being unique, revolutionary, shocking even.
We feel good about admiring the artist whose work no one appreciated a hundred

years ago. But when we get to the art of our own day, we get cold feet and say that

an artist has gone too far, that what he does can no longer be called art. Or, rather,

the media say it for us. And, on the whole, we agree because we expect to be puzzled
by art’s insistent newness — so much so that we do not notice the old themes, methods
and also virtues that the art of our own time is full of.

We require artists to be separate from the rest of us, figures with special talents and

drive, so vigorous that conventions cannot contain them. Previous ages went to artists

with commissions: people needed art for specific purposes, and it was part of their
ordinary life. Today we leave artists to their own devices and get rather cross with

them if they want to come down out of the clouds.

According to the writer, how do people react to modern art these days?

o00OUP

in an unrestrained way

in an illogical way

in an unconventional way
in an unpredictable way

In the second paragraph, the writer makes the point that artists are no longer regarded as

people with

A amessage to impart.
Ban unusual lifestyle.
Carole in society.

D sa functional skill.

85


=== Page 91 ===

Test 4

21

22

86

Picture This

Iam going to describe a situation, and then ask a crucial question about it. I hope
it doesn’t strike you as unduly gnomic. But if it does, that’s modern art for you.

Here's the situation. An artist chooses a piece of text in an art book. The text
considers the diversity of pictures. ‘What are they all about?’ it asks dumbly, before
deciding, even more dumbly: ‘There is no end, in fact, to the number of different
kinds of pictures.’ Okay, this is kiddy-language, and so far all it has betrayed is
kiddy-thinking. But stick with me, all you adults out there. The situation is about
to complicate itself.

Having settled on his text, the man then asks someone else to make a canvas for
him, to stretch it and prime it, and then to take it along to a sign painter. He asks
the sign painter to write the chosen text on the canvas. And he gives the sign
painter specific instructions not to attempt anything flashy or charming with the
lettering. The sign painter does all this. On a white canvas, in simple black letters,
he writes the chosen text. So my crucial question is this: is the finished product a
painting?

What is the writer's purpose in paragraph 2?

A to patronise the reader
B_ to deny a contradiction
C to trivialise a concept

D to insult artists in general

What is called into question in the final paragraph?

the validity of the work of art
the reputation of the artist
the quality of the materials
the skill of the sign painter

900NUP


=== Page 92 ===

23

24

Paper 1 Reading

Underground Encounters
At the Mercury Gallery, London until 26th June

It is an unspoken rule of commercial success as a painter that once you have

- developed a profitable line in one genre, you stick to it. Collectors expect an artist

to diligently mine the same seam, and attempts to strike out in a new direction
are usually met at best with indignation and the feeling that the artist has let the
public down.

Why this should be I’m not entirely sure. Gallery owners obviously prefer safe bets,
and perhaps the art-buying public is insecure and needs the comfort of continuity.
A few artists break the mould and get away with it. Picasso and Hockney are two
prime examples. Eric Rimmington is another artist who is now gamely running
contrary to form, and it remains to be seen if he can pull it off. His new show takes
the daring step of swapping the pristine still lifes which have made his name for
paintings of the world of the London Underground.

Railways hold a peculiar charm for Rimmington. From drawings made in the 1980s
of the railway land of London’s Kings Cross Station, it was a logical step to go
beneath the ground and look at what was happening below. The sketches have
provided the material for Underground Encounters, an exhibition of 40 paintings
and drawings which convey the curious magic of this sunken world designed for
a population in transit.

What point is exemplified in the text by the reference to Picasso and Hockney?

A Art buyers tend to prefer certain individual artists or genres.

B_ Artists are rarely appreciated for their commercial insight.

C Artistic styles can be successfully changed or modified.

D_ Certain artistic genres are more profitable than others.

In the writer’s opinion, Rimmington’s current choice of subject matter
A_ represents a natural artistic progression.

Bis a reflection of his unconventional personality.

Cis likely to bring him even greater success as an artist.

D_ represents an attempt to reach a wider artistic audience.

87


=== Page 93 ===

Test 4

25

26

88

Extract from a novel

I have escaped to this island with a few books. I do not know why I use the
word ‘escape’. The villagers say jokingly that only a sick man would choose
such a remote place to rebuild. Well then, I have come here to heal myself, if
you like to put it that way.

Apart from the wrinkled old peasant who comes from the village on her
mule each day to clean the house, I am quite alone. I am neither happy nor
unhappy; I lie suspended like a hair or a feather in the cloudy mixtures of
memory. I spoke of the uselessness of art but added nothing truthful about
its consolations. The solace of such work as I do with brain and heart lies in
this - that only there, in the silences of the painter or the writer can reality be
reordered, reworked and made to show its significant side. Our common
actions in reality are simply the sackcloth covering which hides the cloth-of-
gold — the meaning of the pattern. For us artists there waits the joyous
compromise through art with all that wounded or defeated us in daily life; in
this way, not to evade destiny, as the ordinary people try to do, but to fulfil it
in its true potential — the imagination. Otherwise why should we hurt one
another?

The words ‘that only there’ in line 10 refer to the artist’s

mind.

past.

real life.

physical location.

00OU PY

Which of the following best summarises what the writer says about art?

It offers more to the individual than is immediately apparent.
It provides an escape from the difficulties of everyday life.

It provides answers to complex social problems.

It clarifies the way we perceive some experiences.

9000 >

line 10


=== Page 94 ===

Paper 1 Reading

Part 3

You are going to read an extract from an article about refuse collection. Seven paragraphs have
been removed from the extract. Choose from the paragraphs A-H the one which fits each gap
(27~33). There is one extra paragraph which you do not need to use.

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

Garbage in, garbage out

Charging families for each bag of rubbish they produce seems environmentally sound and
economically sensible. It may not be.

Some rituals of modern domestic living vary little
throughout the developed world. One such is
the municipal refuse collection: at regular
intervals, rubbish bags or the contents of
rubbish bins disappear into the bowels of a
special lorry and are carried away to the local
tip.

Ea

Yet the cost of rubbish disposal is not zero at all.
The more rubbish people throw away, the more
rubbish collectors and trucks are needed, and
the more the local authorities have to pay in
landfill and tipping fees. This looks like the most
basic of economic problems: if rubbish disposal
is free, people will produce too much rubbish.

[=| |

But as Don Fullerton and Thomas Kinnaman,
two American economists, have found, what
appears to be the logical approach to an
everyday problem has surprisingly intricate and
sometimes disappointing results.

id

In a paper published last year Messrs Fullerton
and Kinnaman concentrated on the effects of
one such scheme, introduced in July 1992 in

Charlottesville, Virginia, a town of about 40,000
people. Residents were charged 80 cents for
each tagged bag of rubbish. This may sound like
sensible use of market forces. In fact, the
authors conclude, the scheme’s benefits did
not cover the cost of printing materials, the
commissions to sellers and the wages of the
people running the scheme.

a0 |

As we all know, such compacting is done better
by machines at landfill sites than by individuals,
however enthusiastically. The weight of rubbish
collected (a better indicator of disposal costs
than volume) fell by a modest 14% in
Charlottesville. In 25 other Virginian cities where
no pricing scheme was in place, and which were
used as a rough-and-ready control group, it fell
by 3.5% in any case.

[a]

The one bright spot in the whole experience
seems to have been a 15% increase in the
weight of materials recycled, suggesting that
people chose to recycle (which is free) rather
than pay to have their refuse carted away. But
the fee may have little to do with the growth
in recycling, as many citizens were already
participating in Charlottesville’s voluntary scheme.

89.


=== Page 95 ===

Test 4

[=| |

E

This figure is lower than in other studies
covering fewer towns, but is it so surprising? To
reduce their output of rubbish by a lot, people
would have to buy less of just about everything.
A tax of a few cents on the week’s garbage
seems unlikely to make much difference.

Should we conclude that the idea of charging
households for the rubbish they produce is daft?
Not at all: free disposal after all is surely too
cheap. But the effects of seemingly simple
policies are often complex. Intricate economic
models are often needed to sort them out. And
sometimes, the results of this rummaging do not
smell sweet.

A Less pleasing still, some people resorted to
illegal dumping rather than pay to have their
rubbish removed. This is hard to measure
directly but the authors guess that illegal
dumping may account for 30-40% of the
reduction in collected rubbish.

Bit would be foolish to generalise from this one
situation. Economic incentives sometimes
produce unforeseen responses. To
discourage this method of waste disposal,
local authorities might have to spend more
on catching litterers, or raise fines.

C lfthat’s the case, it seems worth considering
whether other factors, such as income and
education, matter every bit as much as price.

In richer towns, for example, people throw
out more rubbish than in poorer ones and
they have less time for recycling.

D Inamore recent study, Messrs Fullerton and
Kinnaman explore the economics of rubbish
in more detail. One conclusion from this
broader study is that pricing does reduce the
weight of rubbish — but not by much. On
average, a 10% increase in sticker prices
cuts quantity only by 0.3%.

90

E To economists, this ceremony is peculiar,
because in most places it is free. Yes,
households pay for the service out of local
taxes but the family that fills four bins with
rubbish each week pays no more than the
elderly couple that fills one.

F The obvious solution is to make households
pay the marginal cost of disposing of their
waste. That will give them an incentive to
throw out less and recycle more (assuming
that local governments provide collection
points for suitable materials).

G True, the number of bags or cans did fall
sharply, by 37%. But this was largely thanks
to the ‘Seattle stomp’, a frantic dance first
noticed when that distant city introduced
rubbish pricing. Rather than buy more tags,
people simply crammed more garbage —
about 40% more — into each container by
jumping on it if necessary.

H Research focused on several American
towns and cities which, in the past few years,
have started charging households for
generating rubbish. The commonest system
is to sell stickers or tags which householders
attach to rubbish bags or cans. Only bags
with these labels are picked up in the weekly
collection.


=== Page 96 ===

Paper1 Reading

Part 4

You are going to read an article about music. For questions 34-40, choose the answer (A, B, C
or D) which you think fits best according to the text. -

Mark your answers on the separate answer sheet.

MUSIC AND THEATRE

Up until quite recently, I would have said that opera is first and foremost theatre. Not any more.
After a brief spell working at a national opera house, I learned that opera is, in fact, only
secondly theatre. The music comes first. That’s as it should be, of course. But I come from a
different world, the world of the theatre, where the word and the actor speaking it have primacy,
where there is nobody out front directing the action once the event is under way, and where
performer and audience (mostly) speak the same language.

At any musical performance, whether in concert hall or opera house, there will generally be
a substantial minority of people who, like me, have little technical or academic understanding
of music. Some of them will be aware of, possibly even embarrassed by, how much they don’t
know. Most will be awestruck by the skill of the performers. A dazzling coloratura or an
impeccable string section are easy to admire. Even a moderately good musician is showing us
the results of years of punishingly hard work. Being in the audience for top-class music is not
unlike watching an athletics match — we know athletes are doing something broadly similar to
what we do when running for a bus, but we also recognise by how much it exceeds our best
efforts.:

Theatre audiences by contrast, come with a different set of expectations. In the main they do
not understand the nature of an actor’s skill and are not particularly awed by an activity which,
a lot of the time, appears to be very close to what they could do themselves. They are not usually
impressed when an actor completes a long and difficult speech (although ‘how do you learn all
those lines?’ is the question every actor gets asked). None of this means that theatre audiences
are more generous or less demanding than their counterparts in the concert hall; indeed quite a
lot of them are the same people. What perhaps it does mean is that audiences and performer
meet on more equal terms in the theatre than elsewhere, no matter how challenging the material
or spectacular the event. The question is, does music need to learn anything from the theatre
about this relationship? I would say yes, partly because I have seen how a different approach
can transform the concert-goer’s experience.

Music in live performance is inherently theatrical, full of passion, humour, melancholy,
intimacy, grandeur; vulnerable to the possibility that something will go unexpectedly wrong,
reaching into the imagination of the listener not just as an individual but as part of a collective.
The conventions which still largely dominate music presentation, including strict dress codes
and an exaggerated deference to the status of conductors and soloists, emphasise the difference
between players and listeners in a way which often feels uncomfortably hierarchical. On the
other hand, the tendency of contemporary music audiences to interrupt the momentum of
performance by applauding between movements or after a particular piece of virtuosity, while
it is often a spontaneous expression of appreciation, can also be insensitive to the dramatic
integrity of the whole work.

91


=== Page 97 ===

Test 4

34

35

36

92

Is there anything to be done? Of course a huge amount is being done. Pioneering work is
going on all over the country to encourage new audiences into concert halls and opera houses,
and to break down the barriers that make people feel that ‘serious’ music is not for them. I
remember a remarkable event, the staging of Jonathan Dove’s community opera Jn Search of
Angels, which followed the action from location to location within a cathedral and then out into
the town. It was a musical experience of the highest order, in which the skills, and the generosity,
of the professional musicians were absolutely central and it was also life-changing for many of
the audience, who were not just there to see and hear but also to contribute directly. ;

Perhaps what I yearn for in music is a bit more of the risk and radicalism that theatre at its
best can display. Sometimes it can come from the use of unfamiliar or challenging locations,
where normal expectations are disrupted. This can have startling effects on performer and
audience alike. Comforts may have to be foregone; perhaps the acoustic isn’t great, maybe it’s
a bit cold, but theatre audiences have learned to be intrepid as they follow artists into the most
unpromising spaces. I accept that most plays get put on in a pretty uncontroversial way, not
greatly different from what happens in a concert hall. However I remain convinced that
something can and should happen to change the conventions of music-going. The only authority
I can claim is that of the enthusiast: I love, and live by, the theatre and I spend as much time
(and money) as I can going to hear music. I want them both to thrive, and for more and more
people to get the pleasure I get from being the audience.

What does the writer imply in the first paragraph?

A_ She finds opera difficult to appreciate.

B_ She recognises some shortcomings of the theatre.
C_ She has re-evaluated her view of opera.

D_ She is reluctant to change her view of the theatre.

The writer says that a significant number of people who attend musical performances may

A lack her specialist knowledge.

B_ have a sense of inadequacy.

C_ be unimpressed by the musicians’ talent.

D_ make no attempts to engage with the music.

What point is exemplified by the reference to athletes in the second paragraph?

A Musicians have to train for longer than athletes.

B_ Athietes find performing in public demanding.

C Audiences recognise the particular talent of the musicians.
D itis harder to become an athlete than a musician.


=== Page 98 ===

37

38

39

40

Paper1 Reading

What does the writer say about theatre audiences?

A Their assumptions are different from concert audiences.
B_ They regard the actor's technique as crucial.

C_ Their appraisal of performances is realistic.

D_ They are iess critical than concert audiences.

What is the writer's attitude towards the conventions surrounding musical performance?

Alt is unreasonable to expect instant changes.

B_ They enable the audience to show respect for the performers.
C_ It is important to retain some traditions.

D_ They can result in a feeling of divisiveness.

What was it about the staging of In Search of Angels that impressed the writer?

the size of the auditorium

the absence of commercial motivation
the composition of the audience

the opportunity for audience participation

900OU>Y>

In the final paragraph, the writer expresses a desire to see more

cooperation between musicians and actors.
suitable facilities at venues.

chailenging music in theatrical performances.
innovation in musical performances.

00U>

93


=== Page 99 ===

Test 4
PAPER 2. WRITING (2 hours)

Part 1

You must answer this question. Write your answer in 300-350 words in an appropriate style.

1 You read the extract below taken from an interview in a media magazine. The Editor has
invited readers to contribute articles entitled ‘Books — An Endangered Species?’. Write an
article responding to the issues raised and expressing your own views.

eae 7
—— en a ate ee

Some people believe that books are an endangered species, fighting
for survival in competition with TV, film, the Internet and CD
Roms. But | believe books provide unique incellectual pleasures.
The mind is free to create its own images, rather than passively
receiving them from a TV or computer screen. It’s just as easy to

open a-book as it is to switch on the TV or computer, and often
more convenient.

Write your article.

94


=== Page 100 ===

Paper 2 Writing

Part 2

Write an answer to one of the questions 2—5 in this part. Write your answer in 300-350 words in an
appropriate style.

2 Atelevision company is looking for people who would be willing to spend six months on a desert
island with 20 others. The participants will have to survive without electricity, telephone and other
modern devices, and their experiences will be filmed for a future programme. Write a letter
saying why you would like to take part and what you would hope to learn from the experience.
Write your letter. Do not write any postal addresses.

3 You see a poster on your college notice board about celebrating the end of the academic year.
The Student Social Committee has made some suggestions — a dinner, a disco, a concert —
and has asked for other ideas. You decide to send in a proposal, commenting on these
possibilities, and stating which idea you think would be the best and why.

Write your proposal.

4 A film magazine is producing a series of reviews called ‘The Funniest Films Ever Made’. You
decide to send in a review. In your review, describe briefly what happens in the film, say what
makes the film particularly successful, and why you think it should be considered the funniest
film ever made.

Write your review.

5 Based on your reading of one of these books, write on one of the following.

(a) Anne Tyler: The Accidental Tourist

A recent series of articles in a literary magazine has been dealing with the theme of animals in
literature. In one of the articles it was said ‘A dog cannot possibly have a significant role in a
novel for adults’. You write a letter in which you discuss this comment with reference to the dog,
Edward, and the role he plays in The Accidental Tourist.

Write your letter. Do not write any postal addresses.

(b) John Wyndham: The Day of the Triffids

Your tutor has asked you to write an essay comparing Tynsham with Shirning, making reference
to the people there and the way they organise their lives. Say how these people and places
affected Bill Masen.

Write your essay.

(c) Graham Greene: Our Man in Havana

Your class has been studying Our Man in Havana, and your tutor has asked you to write an
essay on the theme ‘Loyalty, rather than patriotism, is the message of this novel’. Consider the
statement with reference to the characters and actions of Hawthorne and Wormold.

Write your essay.

95


=== Page 101 ===

Test 4
PAPER 3 USE OF ENGLISH (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1

For questions 1-15, read the text below and think of the word which best fits each space. Use only
one word in each space. There is an example at the beginning (0).

Write your answers in CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet.

Example: o||w HI I c[H | | | | |

ANIMAL IMPRINTING

is through this process that they develop a positive attachment (2) .......... members of their own
species. No (3) .......... do young birds hatch than they must learn to recognise their mother in
(4). to be able to follow and keep close to her for their own safety. (5) .......... this process go
wrong, newly-hatched chicks (6) .......... the risk of becoming lost, and may (7) ......... to harm.
(8) wo... that they possess a high level of mobility, it would be difficult for the mother to keep the
chicks together (9) .......... the assistance of imprinting. The process can take literally (10) ..........
matter of minutes. The first large moving object the chicks see (11) .......... automatically become
‘mother’. In normal circumstances, of course, (12) .......... really is their mother, but under
experimental conditions it can be almost (13) .......... . For instance, (14) .......... the moving object
happens to be an orange balloon on a piece of string, then the balloon becomes ‘mother’. So
powerful is this imprinting process that even after a few days, and (15) .......... the presence of their
real mother, the chicks will choose the balloon.

96


=== Page 102 ===

Paper 3 Use of English

Part 2

For questions 16-25, read the text below. Use the word given in capitals at the end of some of
the lines to form a word that fits in the space in the same line. There is an example at the

beginning (0).

Write your answers in CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet.

Example: |O/||/P|/S|Y|C/H/O/LIOIG/I/SITIS

EVERY TIME WE SAY GOODBYE

According to research by (0) peychologists. one can learn a great deal about
the state of people’s relationships by watching how they say goodbye at

airports. However, it seems that it is not (16) those in the strongest

relationships who make the greatest display of (17) at parting. Such

behaviour is more (18) .......... of couples who have been together for a relatively

short period of time. There is less (19) of people in long-term

relationships showing strong feelings of dependency. This may seem

surprising but it is (20) .......... because the people have been successful in

establishing stability in their relationship and are able to see the separation as
brief and of no great (21) ..........

The expression of emotion at these moments may often reflect (22) .......... and

also the feeling that the person leaving is not fully (23) of just how

important the relationship is to the person being left. The person leaving may
also seem (24) .......... of how unsettling a separation can be for the person left

behind, who may then experience a very real sense of (25) .......... .

PSYCHOLOGY
NECESSARY
RELUCTANT
CHARACTER
LIKELY
PRESUME

SIGNIFY

SECURE
APPRECIATE

AWARE
LONELY

97


=== Page 103 ===

Test 4

Fo

Part 3

r questions 26-31, think of one word only which can be used appropriately in all three

sentences. Here is an example (0).

Ex
0

ample:

Some of the tourists are hoping to get compensation for the poor state of the hotel, and I think
they have @ VETY oo. case.

There’s no point in trying to wade across the river, the current is far too ..

If you’re asking me which of the candidates should get the job, I'm afraid | don’t have any
saeeeeneneranaeveeeteaeeeseeeeeeees views either way.

6[t[R]o[N[c LT]

Write only the missing word in CAPITAL LETTERS on the separate answer sheet.

26

27

Despite the traffic problems, Joe managed to 0.0... cee up for his interview on
time.

I think We SOUIA ..... eee reeeereee back before it gets dark or we'll get lost.

| was sure the holiday would ....0..0...0.. ee out fine in the end.

The government has to take oo. ceereees to hold down taxation if it wants to be
re-elected. n

One of the guides showed the tourists the flight Of oe eeeeeteeeees that led down to the

castle dungeon.

Our theatre group had to learn a set of very intricate ..... ee before we could
perform the local folk dance.

28 During the weekend, thieves stole a priceless oes from the gallery.
There’s sound, but | can’t get Any oe on this TV set.
The newscaster gave AN ACCUrAtE occ teseateeees of the tense situation caused by the

transport strike.

98


=== Page 104 ===

29

30

31

Paper 3 Use of English

The murderer's SUCCEN ....csscssecsssssecssenceeseeeee OF guilt surprised the police.

It is expected that the museum will make a financial loss this year unless prices for
seseeseseaneseesseessesansanessnenes are increased.

The government's reluctant oo... eeeceeeeeeeeees that the unemployment figures had risen
was a shock to everyone. :

The writing is so . .. that | can hardly read it.

’'d been standing in the queue for over half an hour when | suddenly began to feel

There’s Still A oe chance that she'll get here on time if the traffic isn’t too
heavy.

The company was in difficulties and needed an injection Of... eects nee to solve its
problems.

Tonight everyone in the country is converging ON the ....... ees for the New Year

celebrations.

Like all politicians, he was keen to make as much ...
rumours surrounding his opponent’s business dealings.

. as possible from the

99


=== Page 105 ===

Test 4

Part 4
For questions 32—39, complete the second sentence so that it has a similar meaning to the first
sentence, using.the word given. Do not change the word given. You must use between three
and eight words, including the word given.

Here is an example (0).

Example:

0 Do you mind if | watch you while you paint?

objection
DO YOU oes cceeseeereneeeteneereenssecereanestesteasssesessseneraseseseeseeseessenensats you while you paint?
0 | have any objection to my watching ]

Write only the missing words on the separate answer sheet.

32 Many people believe that all cats have tails, but they're wrong.
popular

COMPAL one eeeeecseccsencsesesseneeseneeenesesecscaneneaeenssesecueresecaeeveneetenesesesaneneaeeneeeenes cats have tails.

33 Alan was not a confident person, and that was why he was so shy.
due

AIAIS oo cececesessesscteseseneseseneneseseenanenaraveneneaesseasesesescsenessavevesensssnseatatenenes of confidence.

34 ‘I can’t believe it — I’ve just come into £10,000!’ James shouted.
fuck

JAMES COUN’ ee eeeeesecssetesesecceeeesesteneatscnsaeeveccsusecerenssesacaeeecaeeessteneaesecseeueneneees came into
£10,000.

100


=== Page 106 ===

35

36

37

38

39

Paper 3 Use of English

They weren't getting anywhere until John had a bright idea.

“came

They were getting ....... levenesesesuesenceseasescaesssussssuesesccesecseeacesescscsseassussesueasarenennensneesestens a bright idea.

Peter is not very aware of other people’s feelings.

lacks

Peter oe eeceesestesesesscensccsversnseseseeuesesessceeeussesneetseseesseaesacetensneseesenteneseees comes to other people’s
feelings.

If you don’t know what you're doing, you shouldn't dismantle the clock.

apart

DONE oeecececessccseseescteseseeeeeneseenenesesecseeeestsneaeeneseececsceeseeeenesseseessseeeseoaeeees you know what you’re doing.

Will Tom be abie to type as well now that he’s broken his thumb?
affect

WII TOM'S oo. ceesecsestesecesseseenesesseaeenesessesusneesencsssseanenesecsesteneasensseceesseesessees to type?

Jane will always regret not accepting the opportunity to go to drama school.
turned

Jane will always Wish that 0.0.0... eeeccceeeseesesesseesseecesecesveneeseneneeneasancseseeseaccuesesedeeneneeeseeens the
opportunity to go to drama school.

101


=== Page 107 ===

Test 4

Part 5

For questions 40-44, read the following texts about live and recorded music. For questions 40-43,
answer with a word or short phrase. You do not need to write complete sentences. For question
44, write a summary according to the instructions given.

Write your answers to questions 40—44 on the separate answer sheet.

40

4

102

Music’s significance for the listener at home has been greatly increased by modern
methods of recording. Nevertheless, critics of recorded music are right to point out
that repeated hearings of a particular performance may cause the listener to think that
the interpretation to which he has become accustomed is the only one possible.
Moreover, modern recording techniques, which often, though not invariably, involve
repeated ‘takes’ of short sections of a work in order to eliminate minor flaws, may in
so doing eliminate spontaneity. Great music requires an emotional commitment from
performers which cannot be combined with an obsessional insistence on perfection.

One famous pianist retired from the concert platform at the age of twenty-eight. He
deplored the applause at concerts and became increasingly affected by stage fright. In
any case, he thought that the concert hall would soon disappear because of progress
in the technology of recording. He claimed that the listener at home, by adjusting
controls to his or her personal taste, could come closer to an ideal performance and
reach a depth of musical experience unattainable at a live concert.

This pianist’s dislike of performing in public was rooted in his own peculiar
temperament. He was predominantly solitary, preferring telephone conversations to
face-to-face encounters. However, his ideas should not be dismissed lightly just
because of his personal idiosyncrasies. Music can and does affect the listener without
having to be experienced live or in the company of others.

What, according to the text, is the danger of ‘an obsessional insistence on perfection’
(line 8) when recording music?

Explain in your own words the underlying reasons why the famous pianist disliked
performing at concerts.

line 8



=== Page 108 ===

Paper 3 Use of English

For me, listening to records has many advantages over concert-going. | choose what |
want to hear, when | want to hear it, without having any of the distractions of the concert
hall. Even in the case of opera and ballet, the absence of the visual element enables me
to appreciate the musical content to a greater degree than would otherwise be possible,
and, for this reason, | have often found it helpful to listen to a recording of an opera
before | see it for the first time: conversely, when | know an opera well | can visualise
the scene as I listen to the recording.

Of course, none of this is to say that a recording can ever completely replace a live
performance. The personalities of those taking part and the interaction between the
audience and the performers give live performances a character of their own which
cannot be reproduced in the studio. Nor can these be retained in recordings of live
concerts; indeed all that the latter tends to do is to reveal more clearly the kinds of line 12
imperfection one often fails to notice in the concert hall, where one’s attention is held

by the general momentum of the music. In the last analysis it will always be the live
performance which really matters; nevertheless, the satisfaction to be gained from playing
records is almost limitless.

42 What allows the writer to have a better appreciation of an opera when listening to it at home
rather than a live performance?

43 Which phrase in the first text echoes the ‘kinds of imperfection’ (lines 12-13)?

44 \na paragraph of between 50 and 70 words, summarise in your own words as far as
possible what advantages, according to the two texts, attending a live concert has over
listening to recorded music at home. Write your summary on the separate answer sheet.

103


=== Page 109 ===

Test 4
PAPER 4 LISTENING (40 minutes approximately)

Part 1

You will hear four different extracts. For questions 1-8, choose the answer (A, B or C) which fits

best according to what you hear. There are two questions for each extract.

You hear a lecturer talking about wordplay, that is, using words humorously.

1 How does the speaker feel about wordplay?

A intrigued
B_ delighted
C amused
2 The speaker believes that if people do not share the same sense of humour,

A they stop telling one another jokes.
B_ they start to behave in a more serious way.
C_ they are unlikely to get on well.

Extract 2

You hear a film director talking about actors recording the voices for animated films.

3 The actors cope well with recording voices for animated films because

A_ there are no distractions in the recording studio.
B_ the director provides what they need.
C_ they have been chosen for their special skills.

4 The recording session is video-taped so that

A the director has a copy to work from.
B_ the actors can see themselves.
C_ the animators can get ideas for their drawings.

104



=== Page 110 ===

Paper 4 Listening

You hear part of a radio programme about environmental issues.

5 What concerns the speaker about the environmentalist’s views?

Asher lack of evidence
B_ criticisms from other experts | [5]

C acontradiction in her argument

6 What are the predictions about?

A_ population expansion
B_ global warming

C_ exoloitation of resources

; Extract 4

You hear part of an interview with Pauline, a woman footballer.

7 What does Pauline recall about her experience of playing football while at university?

A. Girls were discriminated against on several occasions.
B_ A fellow player inspired her to take up the sport.
C_ Sporting opportunities were limited.

8 What does Pauline believe will ensure the future of women’s football?

A We need to see women playing a better quality game.
B_ People need to consider women’s football as a serious job.
C Women footballers need to develop their future.

OE

105


=== Page 111 ===

Test 4

Part 2

You will hear part of a radio programme about the sense of hearing. For questions 9-17, complete

the sentences with a word or short phrase.

It's a common

The sound takes the form of a

| 9 | that we all have the same auditory experience.

10 | as it travels to the inner ear.

Only when a sound reaches the

An Australian biologist is sure that men can identify the

He suggests that this skill evolved when man was primarily a

| 11 | , do we register that we have heard it.

12 | of an animal emitting a sound better than women.

The biologist thinks that women can hear shrill sounds so that

they can recognise

14 | in a child’s cry.

Differences in the hearing of males and females have been detected

immediately after

Some people in Manchester have been disturbed by an irritating noise

similar to a

Every one of the | 17

106

received has been from women.


=== Page 112 ===

Paper 4 Listening

Part 3

You will hear a book reviewer on a radio programme about science discussing a book about the
human brain. For questions 18-22, choose the answer (A, B, C or D) which fits best according
to what you hear.

18 According to Peter Hughes, ‘mapping the mind’ is a way of enabling scientists to

help people contro! negative emotions.

explain the basis of human actions. , .
encourage individuals to become more self aware.

understand how character is fixed at an early age.

u0owWwP,Y

19 The author of the book appears to believe that control of brain activity

will require development of new techniques.
will require the invention of new technology.
is close to being a reality.

is already very precise.

o00ouW>

20 One effect of neuroscience being new is that

neuroscientists have no generally agreed goal.

the media pay particular attention to it. | | 20]
considerable funding is available.

o0OU>

there are tight government controls.

21. Inthe reviewer's opinion, the book should have included

social implications.

the technology that is used.

the nature of consciousness.
interactions within the brain.

21

o0aNuU>

22 The book which is being reviewed seems to be

a guide to a popular subject.

one of the first in its field. 22
an academic work for specialists. :

a simplified introduction.

oem i

107


=== Page 113 ===

Test 4

Part 4

You will hear part of a radio programme in which two writers, Tanya and Sam, discuss writing.
For questions 23-28, decide whether the opinions are expressed by only one of the speakers,
or whether the speakers agree.

Write T for Tanya

S for Sam
or B for Both, where they agree.
23 All writers want to be well known. 23

24

25

26

27

28

108

Writing demands self-confidence.

When writers meet, their conversations tend to be very negative.

Readers can recognise the superiority of literature over books written by
celebrities.

The merit of a novel lies in the quality of its ideas.

Writers would find it helpful to discuss their work in progress.

24.



=== Page 114 ===

Paper 5 Speaking

PAPER 5 SPEAKING (19 minutes for pairs of candidates,
28 minutes for groups of three)

This test is also suitable for groups of three students; this only occurs at the last test of a session
where a centre has an uneven number of candidates.

There are two examiners. One (the Interlocutor) conducts the test, providing you with the necessary
materials and explaining what you have to do. The other examiner (the Assessor) will be introduced
to you, but then takes no further part in the interaction.

Part 1 (3 minutes for pairs of candidates, 4 minutes for groups of three)

The Interlocutor first asks you and your partner(s) a few questions which focus on information about
yourselves and personal opinions.

Part 2 (4 minutes for pairs of candidates, 6 minutes for groups of three)

In this part of the test you and your partner(s) are asked to talk together. The Interlocutor places
a single picture or a set of pictures on the table in front of you. This stimulus provides the basis for
a discussion. The Interlocutor first asks an introductory question which focuses on one or two of
the pictures. After about a minute (or two for groups of three), the Interlocutor gives you both/all a
decision-making task based on the same set of pictures.

The picture for Part 2 is on pages C8—C9 of the colour section.

Part 3 (12 minutes for pairs of candidates, 18 minutes for groups of three)

You are each given the opportunity to talk for two minutes, to comment after your partner has
spoken and to take part in a more general discussion.

The Interlocutor gives you a card with a question written on it and asks you to talk about it for
two minutes. After you have spoken, your partner is first asked to comment and then the
Interiocutor asks you both another question related to the topic on the card. This procedure is
repeated, so that your partner receives a card and speaks for two minutes, you are given an
opportunity to comment and a follow-up question is asked. For a group of three, there is a third
card and the procedure is repeated once more.

Finally, the Interlocutor asks some further questions, which leads to a discussion on a general
theme related to the subjects already covered in Part 3.

The cards for Part 3 are on pages C10—C12 of the colour section.

109


=== Page 115 ===

Test 1 Key

Paper1 Reading (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)

1A 2D 3C 4A 5 C 6B 7A 8
10 B 11 C 12 D 13 A 14 A 15 B 16
17 D 18 B

A 9A
Cc

Part 2 (two marks for each correct answer)
19 C 20 B 21 8B 22 A 23 A 24 D 25 A 26 B

Part 3 (two marks for each correct answer)
27 F 28 D 29G 30 H 31 B 32 E 33 A

Part 4 (two marks for each correct answer)
34.C 35 B 36 D 37 A 38 B 39 D 40 D

Paper 2 Writing (2 hours)
Task-specific mark schemes

Question 1

Content
Major points:
The expression of views on the given areas:
* transporting children to school
* loss of trade in town centre
© poor and expensive public transport
Inclusion of possible solutions to the problems above.

Further points:

Any ideas relevant to the discussion of pollution, traffic and accidents and any
possible solutions to people’s concerns, e.g.

© an analysis of why people use their cars so much

© advertising to show dangers of cars and alternative means of transport

Range

Language for expressing and supporting views, and for making recommendations.
Appropriacy of register and format

Appropriate format for a proposal, e.g. clear introduction with possible use of
headings.

110


=== Page 116 ===

Test 1 Key

Organisation and cohesion
Organisation of content into sections. Ideas organised and argument well
structured. Adequate use of linking and paragraphing.

Target reader
The local council would understand the writer’s viewpoint.

Question 2

Content

Description of two or more achievements they consider important (e.g. living
independently, travelling). Personal anecdote is appropriate but the i importance of
the achievement must be made clear.

Range
Language of description, narrative and analysis.

Appropriacy of register and format
Register and format appropriate for an article in a magazine, possibly with use of
section headings.

Organisation and cohesion
Clear development of description and analysis. Adequate use of linking and
paragraphing.

Target reader
Would be interested in the article and encouraged to consider what is most
important in life.

Question 3

Content

Description of how they learnt about the value of money, e.g. pocket money, small
jobs.

Importance of money in relation to other things in life.

Range
Language of description, narrative and discussion.

Appropriacy of register and format
Register and format appropriate for a letter to a newspaper. Register must be
consistent.

Organisation and cohesion
Early reference to reason for writing. Clear organisation of points. Adequate use of
linking and paragraphing.

Target reader
‘Family Page’ editor/readers would have a clear idea of the writer’s experience and
viewpoint.

111


=== Page 117 ===

Test 1 Key

Ouestion 4

Content
Description of the visit to the historical building or site.
Evaluation of the visit and how such visits can encourage the study of history.

Range
Language of description, narration and persuasion.

Appropriacy of register and format
Register and format appropriate for a report for a magazine, possibly including
section headings. Register must be consistent.

Organisation and cohesion ‘

Clear organisation of content with adequate use of linking and paragraphing.

Target reader
Would be well informed about the visit to the building/site.
Would understand the view expressed about history/the past.

Question 5(a)

Content

Clear reference to the book chosen.

Brief summary of the theme of the book, leading to an analysis of Macon’s
-elationship with his brother and sister and how and why it changes.

Range
Language of description, narration and evaluation.

Appropriacy of register and format
Review with register and format appropriate to an arts magazine. Register must be
consistent throughout.

Organisation and cohesion
Clear development from introduction to development of the main focus, leading to
a clear conclusion.

Target reader
Would be informed about the book and know something about Macon’s
celationship with his brother and sister and how and why it changes.

Question 5(b)

Content

Clear reference to the book chosen.

Description of storyline elements relevant to the theme of survival, and an
2valuation of how the survivors deal with their situation.

Range
Language of description, narration and evaluation.

Appropriacy of register and format
Neutral article.

112


=== Page 118 ===

Organisation and cohesion
Clear presentation and development of ideas. Appropriate linking and
paragraphing. Clear conclusion.

Target reader
Would be informed about the theme of survival in the book and understand the
writer’s viewpoint.

Question 5(c)

Content

Clear reference to the book chosen.

Clear reference to the events, characters and relationships in the novel, and some
comment on the qualities of good literature.

Range

Language of description, narration and persuasion.

Appropriacy of register and format

Formal register and format consistent and appropriate for a letter to a literary
magazine.

Organisation and cohesion
Clear presentation and development of the three areas under consideration, with
appropriate linking and paragraphing. Clear conclusion.

Target reader
Would have an understanding of the nature and purpose of the novel, and the
qualities that make it more than just a spy story.

Paper 3 Use of English (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)

1 up 2 whose 3 whatever/what 4 fact 5 Like/like
6 could/would 7 out 8 with 9 Should/should

10 somewhere/anywhere 11 few 12 little 13 means/way
14 have 15 us

Part 2 (one mark for each correct answer)

16 recognisable/recognizable 17 ripens 18 maturity 19 extensively
20 unknown 21 suppliers 22 competitors 23 consequently
24 emergence 25 threatening

Part 3 (two marks for each correct answer)
26 view —-27 serious 28 bear 29 clear 30 running 31 badly

Test 1 Key

113


=== Page 119 ===

Test 1 Key

Part 4 (one mark for each correct section)

32. has/includes/contains/gives/is (1) +.a vivid account of (1)

33 is prone to (1) + attack/getting attacked/being attacked (1)

34 cast/shed/throw (1) + some/any light on how (1)

35 come to terms (1) + with the fact that (1)

36 took me aback / by surprise (1) + when/that you began OR to hear/see you OR
hearing/seeing you (1)

37 not take Janice long (1) + to get over / to get rid of (1) OR not take long for
Janice (1) + to get over (1)

38 until the storm (had) subsided that (1) + the extent (1)

39 to dawn (1) + on Alan (1)

Part 5 (questions 40-43 two marks for each correct answer)
‘40 A viewer may be mystified/confused/puzzled/surprised/amazed.
41 The painting reminds them of something negative/bad.
42 high prices / lots of advance orders
43 ‘too quickly for the taste of’ the surlier culture critics
44 (one mark for each content point, up to ten marks for summary skills)
The paragraph should include the following points:
may evoke pleasant memories
i reproduce real beauty (e.g. natural world)
iii are a status symbol in modern society
iv now seen as a commodity / financial investment / valuable possession

Paper 4 Listening (40 minutes approximately)

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)
1C 2A 3A 4B 5B 6A 7C 8A

Part 2. (one mark for each correct answer)

9 luxury 10 chemical composition 11 (heavy-duty) rollers
12 after(-)taste 13 self(-)medication 14 (the) blood pressure
5 (the/our) mood(s)/emotion(s) 16 guilt 17 treat mentality

Part 3 (one mark for each correct answer)
18 D 19 A 20 D 21 8B 22.C

Part 4 | (one mark for each correct answer)
23 B 24 D 25 B 26 H 27 B 28 D

114


=== Page 120 ===

Transcript

PART 1

Extract 1

Presenter:

Test 1 Key

Certificate of Proficiency in English Listening Test. Test 1.
I'm going to give you the instructions for this test.

I'll introduce each part of the test and give you time to look at the
questions.

At the start of each piece you'll hear this sound:
tone
You'll hear each piece twice.

Remember, while you're listening, write your answers on the question
paper.

You'll have five minutes at the end of the test to copy your answers onto the
separate answer sheet.

There will now be a pause. Please ask any questions now, because you must
not speak during the test.

[pause]

Now open your question paper and look at Part One.
[pause]

You'll hear four different extracts. For questions 1 to 8, choose the answer
(A, B or C) which fits best according to what you hear. There are two
questions for each extract.

[pause]
tone

It’s certainly not that Nunan is untalented. In his earlier films, Lives at Sea for
example, produced, when? 20 years ago and — one of my favourites — it would
have been a much poorer film without the incidental music. The spectacular set
pieces would have suffered from being over long. As it is, we are swept from
mood to mood, changing from passion to serenity in one scene. And why this was
so important was that it actually gave new layers of understanding to the viewer.
We wouldn't have got it otherwise. So / was his fiercest defender, as you may well
remember, because Lives at Sea was so controversial that | felt that it needed
defending; and Nunan’s work particularly so. And then other films started to come
out and the suspicion began to creep up on me that he had one eye firmly on
sales, which then became both eyes and that’s when a very good composer was
lost to us.

[pause]
tone
[The recording is repeated.]

[pause]

115


=== Page 121 ===

Test 1 Key

Extract 2

Presenter:

Paco:

Presenter:
Paco:

Extract 3

116

Interviewer:

Anthony:

[pause]

tone

The international authority on the anthropology of shopping is Paco Underhill.
Paco, how did you become an anthropologist of shopping?

Well, | was an urban geographer, and it occurred to me that the same tools that I'd
been using to look at what made a good street or the dynamics of a bus stop |
could use to see what makes a good store.

Tell me a bit about the methodology.

We've basically taken the tools of anthropology and simply applied them to your
local store. We collect information in a variety of different ways. For example, we
assign what we call trackers to a store, which is somebody who just chooses a
customer randomly as they enter an aisle or doorway, and simply observes them
through their shopping process. Their instructions are simply to look, and if they
feel that they’re making the person uncomfortable, to just abandon that one and
go find somebody else. At the same time we are following people, we have video
cameras filming. There is no piece of behaviour too small for our cameras or
trackers to record.

[pause]

tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

[pause]

tone

Anthony, have you any advice for people who have some money to invest, buying
stocks and shares, that sort of thing?

Well yes, | think there would be a few things | would highlight. | think going against
the trend is a good way to invest. Of course, not everyone can do this. Some
people like the comfort they get from doing what everyone else is doing. And also
| think | would recommend, generally, not to worry about timing, as it’s a very
difficult thing to know exactly when to buy and sell your shares, and get it right
every time. And another thing, they shouldn't just buy on tips or whatever, they
should really try and understand the business, the underlying business, you know.
And well, finally, I'd suggest that if there is an area that someone has had
experience in, for example, if they’d been a doctor and knew about medicine,
perhaps they should concentrate their investments in that area, because then
they'll have a bit of a competitive edge on the mass of investors who don’t have
such specialist knowledge.

[pause]
tone
[The recording is repeated.}

[pause]


=== Page 122 ===

Extract 4

Presenter:

Irene:

Presenter:

lrene:
Presenter:

lrene:

Presenter:

PART 2

Presenter:

Test 1 Key

[pause]
tone

My guest today is Irene Donovan, who leads the all-woman band she formed

50 years ago, which still carries her name, and she’s just brought out a book to
celebrate that auspicious anniversary. Irene, the band isn’t a unique phenomenon,
is it?

We're certainly not a one-off, or even the first. But, you know, people come up to
me and say ‘I saw you play in Jamaica,’ or wherever, and I’ve never been there in
my life. You see, mine is the only name people remember.

You haven't let up on your gruelling programme of tours?

No, I’m still going strong, touch wood.

Now when it all started, so long ago, how did the bandleaders then react to an
all-woman band? It must have been quite unusual.

Well they more or less accepted it with a sort of snigger really, they thought, oh
well, it’s a bit ropey, won't be long before it folds, won't affect us. But | was
determined to make the grade if | possibly could, and | was able to put together
some pretty strong musicians.

And you've always kept up a high standard, haven’t you?

[pause]

tone

[The recording is repeated.]
That’s the end of Part One.

Now turn to Part Two.

[pause]

You'll hear part of a radio programme about chocolate. For questions 9 to
17, complete the sentences with a word or short phrase.

You now have forty-five seconds in which to look at Part Two.
[pause]

tone

When it was introduced to London in the mid-seventeenth century, a pound of
chocolate cost the equivalent of £500, and by the eighteenth century this
quintessentially blameless bedtime drink was seen as the height of indulgence.
So, what exactly is it about chocolate that has taken it from luxury to near-
universal pleasure? Dr Peter Barham of the Physics department at Bristol
University has been trying to find out. He analysed the physics and chemistry of
chocolate from pod to bar, and discovered what it is that makes it so appealing.

The reasons for cravings for chocolate lie in its chemical composition.
Chocolate, like coffee, contains caffeine, but according to Dr Barham the main
stimulant is another chemical, the name of which comes from the Latin for the
cocoa tree.

117


=== Page 123 ===

Test 1 Key

118

The reason why chocolate feels so good when we eat it is because of its
particle size, Dr Barham says. Particle size, apparently, imparts that familiar rich,
creamy texture. And it is this richness that advertising copywriters use to market
chocolate as a sensuous pleasure. During the manufacture of chocolate, the liquid
mixture is crunched through heavy-duty rollers. This reduces the particles of solid
ingredients in the chocolate to microscopic size. And the smaller the particles, the
better the emulsion — the liquid with tiny solid particles suspended in it. Basically,
the smaller the particles, the thicker the emulsion, which is important if you like
chocolate to linger in the mouth and give a pleasing after-taste.

Another person investigating the subject is Professor David Warburton, head of
the Psychopharmacology department of Reading University. According to his
research, chocolate increases feelings of well-being; indeed, eating too much
chocolate may be a form of self-medication. Professor Warburton found that more
than fifty per cent of people who eat four squares of chocoiate feel in a better
frame of mind afterwards. This is thought to be because chocolate contains a
molecule which is closely related to amphetamines. This raises blood pressure
and boosts glucose levels, making people feel more alert and giving a sense of
well-being. Over-indulging on chocolate may, in fact, be an attempt to regulate the
chemicals that control mood after an emotionally upsetting incident.

Chocolate addiction has been studied by doctors Marion Hetherington and
Jennifer Macdiarmid from the University of Dundee. They have found that
although eating chocolate made people feel better, in genuine addicts the
pleasure was short-lived. Most felt incredibly guilty after a chocolate binge. And
this guilt may do them even more harm since guilt creates stress hormones, which
mobilise fatty acids such as cholesterol and cholesterol clogs up arteries, which,
as we all know, can lead to certain illnesses.

According to psychologist Corinne Sweet, we have what's called a ‘treat
mentality’, which means we can become emotionally addicted to chocolate. We
are hooked on rewarding ourselves for ‘good behaviour’, but these treats are
ultimately bad for us. Rewards, convenience food, comfort food — however we
view chocolate, we need to recognise that chocolate is not really a healthy food
option.

[pause]

Now you'll hear Part Two again.
tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

That’s the end of Part Two.
Now turn to Part Three.

[pause]


=== Page 124 ===

PART 3

Interviewer:

Derek Allen:

Interviewer:
Derek Allen:

interviewer:

Derek Allen:

Test 1 Key

You'll hear an interview with Derek Allen, an author, about the writing
process. For questions 18 to 22, choose the answer (A, B, C or D) which fits
best according to what you hear.

You now have one minute in which to look at Part Three.
[pause]
tone

... OK, and now we move to our section on books and authors. The book we're
discussing today is Travelling in Space and we'll be discussing it with its creator,
Derek Allen. It was originally presented as a 12-part radio series and it’s a pretty
outrageous and satirical science fiction epic but offers a gleefully pessimistic view
of modern society. A year later, the book of the radio programme was published
and it went straight to the top of the best-seller list — it sold 10,000 copies in the
first month alone. Derek Allen, welcome. Now, can { start by asking you what is
the essence of its success?

Of course, it's an unanswerable question. If one knew the answer, one could
bottle it. The only thing ! can say with any degree of certainty is that, however
extraordinary its success may have turned out to be, there's a little bit of me that
isn’t surprised because | actually know how much | put into it in terms of worry and
stress. | mean, we all know the packaging can be very attractive but it’s what's
inside that matters. And, you see, there’s a little bit of me that doesn’t expect
anything I’ve written to be any good, so you work at it a bit more and a bit more,
and you are so determined to pack everything in, so it doesn’t surprise me that
people have got so much out of it in the end.

It's a funny thing, isn’t it, radio and writing books go together, don’t they?

The overlap between radio listeners and a book audience is absolutely enormous,
very much more so than between a book audience and television. But it is words.
Now the thing is that one of the strengths of the book is that | originally wrote it all
as dialogue. Now the thing about that is that the characters, therefore, are forced
to tell the story. So the range of dialogue the characters have to employ is
enormous. The mere fact of getting the characters always having to be the ones
who tell the story, that gives you a tremendously good backbone for then writing a
book.

Absolutely. Now, the thing that strikes me is that in some ways you are ‘sending
up’ the craft of science fiction and yet you’ve become a hero of the genre.
Curious, isn’t it?

As far as | was concerned, | wasn't ‘sending up’ science fiction. | was using science
fiction as a vehicle for ‘sending up’ everything else. In comedy, for example, a
sketch can create some sort of surreal premise on which a universe is based that
will then last for two or three minutes and then you’re on to the next scene. And |
always wanted to say — but what are the consequences of that surreal premise?
So, for example, right back at the beginning of the story, it could start with a man
whose house is demolished to make way for a by-pass and so it then becomes
conceivable that the earth then gets demolished to make way for a hyper-space
by-pass. OK, now let's move it on again, let's give that consequences and of
course, once you've blown up the earth, you are kind of committed to science
fiction!

119


=== Page 125 ===

Tes

t 1 Key

Interviewer:

Derek Allen:

_ Interviewer:
Derek Allen:

Interviewer:

PART 4

120

Daniel:

Helena:

Daniel:

Yes, and the other thing | notice is that while most writers avoid situations based
on coincidence, you positively revel in it.

Yes, well, coincidence is the thing that for many authors indicates that the plot has
broken down and he is in danger of losing the reader! But | decided to embrace
coincidences. As a coincidence is difficult to write about and to do it successfully
you have to understand the force that you're dealing with. For example, | can put
characters in great jeopardy and you have a dilemma, which is, that if the
jeopardy is going to mean anything, then you can’t get them out of it with one
bound. So it’s got to be something, something that’s going to be of equal weight. |
was watching a TV programme on judo where the principle is to use your
opponent's weight against himself. So every problem | come up with has to be
resolved by something that is equally implausible!

So is this all clearly delineated for you before you start?

Well, no, normally what an artist would do is rough out the general shape of the
picture — a man’s going to be standing here, there’s going to be a donkey over
here or whatever and you've got the main shape of the picture. Then you
gradually put in a background — you rough it out in grey and then you put in the
layers of paint but the first thing that's there is the shape of it.

Now, if /was a painter, | would start painting in enormous detail down in the
bottom left-hand corner and by the time | got to the top, everything would be out of
scale.

Right, OK well, let’s bring in our guest reviewer now ...

[pause]

Now you'll hear Part Three again.
tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

That’s the end of Part Three.
Now turn to Part Four.

[pause]

You'll hear two travel agents talking about the rise in popularity of
adventure holidays. For questions 23 to 28, decide whether the opinions are
expressed by only one of the speakers, or whether the speakers agree. Write
D for Daniel, H for Helena, or B for both, where they agree.

You now have thirty seconds in which to look at Part Four.
[pause]
tone

What did you think of the talk, Helena? — the one given by the woman from
Breakout Travel.

Yeah, interesting stuff. So, adrenaline adventure trips are what we'll be selling
more of in the next few years.

Mm. | liked the phrase she coined. What was it? The fear-good factor. So
apparently what people are craving now are white-knuckle journeys of derring-do.


=== Page 126 ===

Helena:

Daniel:

Helena:

Daniel:

Helena:
Daniel:
Helena:

Daniel:

Helena:

Daniel:

Helena:

Daniel:

Helena:

Daniel:

Helena:

Daniel:

Helena:

Daniel:

Test 1 Key

I've noticed how people who are trying out this adventure-style travel are coming
back for more. Once they've tried whale watching, chasing tornadoes or
hammering along white water rapids on a raft, they're quite simply hooked.

There does seem to be a real lure to this type of travel — they can’t keep away.

\t does strike me that more and more people are choosing to take their lives into
their own hands when they go on holiday.

| suppose come the annual holiday some people go looking for the ultimate
challenge. | guess it's a way out if you’re stuck in a rut, feeling fed up with a
humdrum existence.

| felt totally exhausted just hearing about some of the trips Breakout organise.
Yeah, can you imagine spending your long-earned, two weeks off like that?

You'd get to the end of the day completely done in because your adrenaline levels
have rocketed. Come to think of it though, I’d give it a go. Like the white water
rafting ...

What, where you're paddling along in your raft very happily, thinking you're
comfortable and the next second being plunged into freezing cold water. | wouldn't
find that thrilling.

But that's just it. You’d be absolutely in it, in the thick of that element, with no way
to ever remove yourself from it — that must be the real high of it.

Well, anyway, it doesn’t matter what | think. If my customers come in wanting
thrills and spills, it's up to me to sell them something that'll live up to their
expectations.

| wonder what it'll mean for all the ‘sun ’n’ sea’ type holidays we sell in their
thousands every year? | mean, with people wanting something more adventurous,
lying in the sun is no longer enough, especially taking into account the ease of ...
... discovering uncharted rivers or sailing across the Atlantic in a eather boat.
(laughs) Easy, | don’t think so.

Ease of availability and affordability, | was going to say! For our parents’
generation going on a package tour to wherever was the pinnacle of excitement. It
must have been mould-breaking then, but now things have moved on.

We were brought up doing that every year, thinking there must be something else,
something more and everyone must have felt the same. And maybe adventure
travel is it.

Don’t you think though, these holidays are really only for dare-devils, whatever
your views on green issues. | mean, there is such a thing as your own personal
challenge level.

I'd never go climbing ice cliffs myself. But even with no previous experience, if you
have enough determination to get the hang of new skills, surely nothing will stop
you.

What surprises me is this family aspect of adventure travel which is on the
increase.

Mn, like the example quoted of the family who went to northern Thailand ...

[pause]
Now you'll bear Part Four again.
tone

[The recording is repeated.]

121


=== Page 127 ===

Test 1 Key

122

[pause]
That’s the end of Part Four.

There'll now be a pause of five minutes for you to copy your answers onto
the separate answer sheet, Be sure to follow the numbering of all the
questions. I'll remind you when there is one minute left, so that you're sure
to finish in time.

[pause]
You have one more minute left.
[pause]

That's the end of the test. Please stop now.


=== Page 128 ===

Test 2 Key

Paper1 Reading (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)

1B 2A 3.C 4D 5B 6A 7B 8B
10 C 11 A 12 D 13 A 14 D 15 B 16 A
17 A 18 D

Part 2 (two marks for each correct answer)
19 A 20 C 21 A 22.C 23 C 24 8B 25 A 26 B

Part 3 (two marks for each correct answer)
27 C 28 H 29 E 30 G 31 D 32 A 33 F

Part 4 (two marks for each correct answer)
34 C 35 B 36 A 37 B 38 D 39 C 40 D

Paper 2) Writing (2 hours)
Task-specific mark schemes

Question 1

Content

Major points:

The role of computers in education, and their impact on:
¢ the classroom

¢ teachers

¢ learning

The writer’s own viewpoint on the matter.

Further points:

Any other points relevant to the discussion.

Range

Language for expressing and supporting opinions, and for reaching conclusions.
Appropriacy of register and format

Formal essay-type register. Register appropriate to the writer’s role as a student.
Organisation and cohesion

Clear organisation of points with adequate use of paragraphing. Logical
development of argument and clear conclusion(s).

Target reader
Would have a clear understanding of the writer’s viewpoint.

123


=== Page 129 ===

Test 2 Key

Question 2

Content

Description of present leisure and sports facilities.
Evaluation of their use and quality.

Recommendations for improving and extending facilities.

Range
Language of description, analysing, evaluating and making recommendations.

Appropriacy of register and format
Register and format appropriate for that of a proposal, possibly with relevant
section headings. Register can be formal or neutral in tone, but must be consistent.

Organisation and cohesion
Presentation of ideas and information should be well structured and organised into
sections. Adequate use of linking and paragraphing.

Target reader
Would be informed of level and quality of present facilities for young people.
Would understand what recommendations are being made.

Question 3

Content

Description of the interior of the restaurant.
Description of the food and service.

Evaluation of the restaurant and clear recommendation.

Range
Language of description, evaluation and recommendation.

Appropriacy of register and format
Formal/informal register and format appropriate for a review. Register must be
consistent.

Organisation and cohesion
Clear development of ideas with adequate use of linking and paragraphing, and
possible use of headings.

Target reader
Would be informed about the restaurant and the experience.
Would be able to decide whether or not the restaurant is to be recommended.

Question 4

Content

The letter should provide appropriate information about the chosen individual;
a significant proportion of the letter should be devoted to reasons why the
individual should win the title; it should evaluate the significance of the
individual’s contribution over the past ten years.

124


=== Page 130 ===

Test 2 Key

Range
Language of description, analysis, persuasion and recommendation.

Appropriacy of register and format
Register and format appropriate for a letter to a radio programme. Register can be
formal/informal but must be consistent.

Organisation and cohesion

Well-structured argument, which can be either a clear division between
information and the evaluation of the individual or an integrated approach in
which the person is simultaneously described and evaluated.

Adequate use of linking and paragraphing. A clear conclusion is necessary.

Target reader
Should be informed about the person and persuaded of the significant contribution
they have made to society.

Question S(a)

Content

Clear reference to the book chosen.

Description and comparison of the Leary household and Muriel’s home in
Singleton Street, and analysis of how Macon adapts to each one.

Range
Language of description, comparison and analysis.

Appropriacy of register and format
Neutral article.

Organisation and cohesion
Clear presentation and development of ideas. Appropriate linking and
paragraphing. Clear conclusion.

Target reader
Would understand the writer’s viewpoint.

Question 5(b)

Content

Clear reference to the book chosen.

Reasons for popularity of science fiction, e.g. elements of horror, treatment of
topical issues.

Description of storyline and the Triffids, and how the characters respond to fear of
the unknown.

Range

Language of description, narration, persuasion and evaluation.

Appropriacy of register and format

Formal letter appropriate for the Arts Page of a newspaper. Register must be
consistent throughout.

‘ 125


=== Page 131 ===

Test 2 Key

Organisation and cohesion
Clear presentation and development of ideas with appropriate linking of
paragraphs from the introduction to the main body of the letter. Clear conclusion.

Target reader
Would be clear about why the book would make a good film.

Question 5(c)

Content

Clear reference to the book chosen.

Clear identification of Segura’s role with reference to his behaviour and actions
when dealing with other characters.

Comparison of villainous and redeeming features of his character.
Range .

Language of description, narration, comparison and evaluation.
Appropriacy of register and format

Article appropriate for magazine.

Organisation and cohesion

Clear presentation and development of ideas. Appropriate linking and
paragraphing. Clear conclusion.

Target reader
Would have a balanced and rounded view of Segura’s character.

Paper 3 Use of English (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)

1 itself 2 though/when/if 3 few 4 than 5 Apart/apart
6 many 7 make/scrape 8 at 9 place/hold/root 10 up
11 Despite/despite 12 capable 13. this/that 14 in 15 such

Part 2 (one mark for each correct answer)

16 disapproval 17 appreciably 18 unwise 19 modification(s)
20 ambiguity 21 undergoing 22 infrequent 23 noticeable
24 maintenance 25 effective

Part 3 (two marks for each correct answer)

26 influence 27 sensitive 28 dedicated 29 line 30 concern
31 confidence

Part 4 (one mark for each correct section)

32 is restricted to (1) + those in / those passengers in / passengers in (1)
33 no circumstances (1) + should/must this door be / should/must you leave this
door / is this door to be (1)

126


=== Page 132 ===

Test 2 Key

34 were (always) a (constant/continual) source (1) + of (continual) embarrassment
to (1)

35 prospects are there / are the prospects (1) + of the new venture’s/venture getting
(1) OR prospects does the new venture (1) + have of getting (1)

36 take much/ take a lot of (1) + notice of (1)

37 far as Colin (1) + is/’s concerned (1)

38 took (1) + exception to (1)

39 in the dark (1) + for her own (1)

Part 5 (questions 40-43 two marks for each correct answer)

40 It is a metaphor of hunting applied to the modern world.

41 (Because since eating grass all day long is a monotonous activity) the
herbivores’ descendants would be adapted to a monotonous existence.

_42 Seeing only what we want to.

43 By not interacting with fellow city dwellers we avoid overloading ourselves and
others with unnecessary stimuli.

44 (one mark for each content point, up to ten marks for summary skills)
The paragraph should include the following points:

i Some people (e.g. businessmen) find stimulus in work.
ii Some people with boring jobs have fascinating hobbies.
iii Stimuli of modern life can lead to quicker reactions.
iv Too many stimuli can lead to people switching off and ignoring them /
adopting new rules of behaviour.

Paper 4 Listening (40 minutes approximately)

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)
1C 2B 3.C 4B 5C 6B 7B 8C

Part 2. (one mark for each correct answer)

9 (obstacle) course 10 blood 11 (the very nature of) intelligence
12 (small) brains 13 dustbin 14 video camera / camcorder

15 (the) training/teaching (of) (a) dog(s)/animal(s) 16 shorthand

17 vacuum cleaner

Part 3 (one mark for each correct answer)
18 D 19 A 20 C 21 B 22 C

Part 4 (one mark for each correct answer)
23 D 24B 25 K 26 B 27 K 28 D

127


=== Page 133 ===

Test 2 Key

Transcript

PART 1

Extract 1

128

Presenter:

Ray:

Presenter:
Ray:

Presenter:
Ray:

Certificate of Proficiency in English Listening Test. Test 2.
I’m going to give you the instructions for this test.

I'll introduce each part of the test and give you time to look at the
questions.

At the start of each piece you'll hear this sound:
tone
You'll hear each piece twice.

Remember, while you’re listening, write your answers on the question
paper.

You'll have five minutes at the end of the test to copy your answers onto the
separate answer sheet.

There will now be a pause. Please ask any questions now, because you must
not speak during the test.

[pause]

Now open your question paper and look at Part One.

[pause]

You'll hear four different extracts. For questions 1 to 8, choose the answer
(A, B or C) which fits best according to what you hear. There are two
questions for each extract.

[pause]
tone

1m standing in Wicksteed Park with its managing director, Ray Taylor. Ray,
Wicksteed is a very successful amusement park, isn’t it?

It certainly is, and it's the largest free playground in Europe, with rides that go from
ones for kiddies and their grandparents to white-knuckle rides for the aficionado
who doesn’t mind screaming and getting their stomach turned upside down, the
ones | only go on once and never again.

And how did it all start?

It was developed from about 1916 as the dream of Charles Wicksteed, who
founded and ran a local engineering works, and wanted to do something for the
local community.

He was also an inventor, wasn’t he?

That's right, it was a hobby he was passionate about. He was responsible for
several of our rides, and about 1925 he invented this amazing-looking contraption,
which is the world’s first bread cutting and buttering machine, for the five thousand
teas that had to be prepared every day. it had a tremendous output — 2500 slices
an hour, and every piece a winner.


=== Page 134 ===

Extract 2

Speaker:

Extract 3

Presenter:

Joachim Rowntree:

Presenter:

Test 2 Key

{pause]

tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

[pause]

tone

| vividly remember standing secretly on the top flight of the stairs at home,
listening up through the hatch in the ceiling into the loft, where my father, who was
an amateur radio enthusiast, would sit endlessly until two or three in the morning
sending and receiving messages on his radio transmitter. | didn’t know who the
strange voices belonged to, but it was a magic discovery for me. There was life
beyond the small provincial town | lived in and it gave me an insatiable appetite to
taste it.

My first job on leaving school was delivering televisions. | was also pursuing,
what was for me, very much a passion, trying to be in a pop group, write songs
and make records and things. One afternoon in 1978, | was driving around the
centre of town and suddenly on Radio 1, came my record. It was the most
traumatic moment of my life. It was the most overwhelming thing to realise that
something that we had done, that started out as a couple of kids making noises in
a spare bedroom at home, was suddenly now on national radio.

[pause]
tone
[The recording is repeated.]

[pause]

[pause]
tone

Tonight's Front Row takes us to the heart of theatreland, the Great White Way,
Broadway, and we talk to the multi-faceted Joachim Rowntree, ex film actor and
acerbic theatre critic of the magazine Village Voice but very much in the news at
the moment with the success of his directorial debut The Papermaker — the story
of an ageing actor finding himself on a retreat in the backwoods — and breaking
box-office records since its recent opening. Tonight in yet another new role, that of
theatre historian, Rowntree explores the genre of theatrical works of self-
discovery, similar to The Papermaker, discussing their role as the conscience of
Broadway.

| think I’ve tried it all in theatre now, except perhaps coming up with the actual
script, but I'm getting too old for that now and | want time away from the bustle of
theatres to think and read about my craft, take stock and | think | maybe do have
something to say because | have tried my hand at so much ...

That’s Front Row, tonight at 7.15, with Joachim Rowntree.

129


=== Page 135 ===

Test 2 Key

Extract 4

Speaker:

PART 2

Interviewer:

Prof. Shepherd:

130

[pause]

tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

[pause]

tone

Well, an important development in giving a brand name to a new product was
PROKAZ, and the role of the name was to establish very quickly the product as
something that would become associated with a particular emotional experience,
and that was it makes you feel better.

So | began to look at common word parts across many languages that would
communicate the main benefits of the product, and one of those was, you know,
positive, feelings. Now | realised that ‘PRO’ was a prefix that worked in many
languages that had connotations and suggestions of positivity, something positive.

Then, | also wanted the word to sound modern and scientific, and letters like Z
weren't used very much in brand names at this time. So | looked at Zs and |
looked at Xs and | looked at Ks, and | began to realise that there were certain
sounds that sounded modern and also gave the idea of something dynamic and
forward moving, and that’s how | got to ‘KAZ’. And the word PROKAZ is now
actually in popular use, so you could argue that a totally new word was invented.

[pause]

tone

[The recording is repeated.]

[pause]

That’s the end of Part One.

Now turn to Part Two.

[pause]

You'll hear the beginning of an interview in which a university professor

talks about the robot he has designed, called Jeremy. For questions 9 to 17,
complete the sentences with a word or short phrase.

You now have forty-five seconds in which to look at Part Two.
[pause]
tone

Professor John Shepherd is the inventor of Jeremy, a rather remarkable robot,
who has just completed some significant trials. Professor Shepherd, how did
Jeremy get on?

Well, he came through with flying colours. He showed that he can whistle while he
works, and that he can negotiate a pretty demanding obstacle course without
bumping into anything.


=== Page 136 ===

Interviewer:
Prof. Shepherd:

Interviewer:
Prof. Shepherd:

Interviewer:
Prof. Shepherd:

Interviewer:
Prof. Shepherd:

Interviewer:

Prof. Shepherd:

Interviewer:
Prof. Shepherd:

Interviewer:
Prof. Shepherd:

Test 2 Key

Tell me, what's the point of robots like this?

There are two major reasons for constructing robots. One is quite practical: to
build useful devices. Robots are now common in medical laboratories, for
instance, to handle potentially hazardous materials, such as blood. In factories
they make cars. They can carry out repetitive tasks for long periods accurately,
whereas boredom causes people to make mistakes. And they aren't affected by
working conditions that we would find intolerable. There’s also a growing demand
from the general public for robots for the home, both to take over household
chores — polishing, perhaps — and as what you might call gimmicks — the robot as
butler or pet dog.

And the other reason for making them?

Well, fun though it would be to have robots around the house, this is really by way
of being a by-product of a more important and challenging goal. You see, through
constructing robots we're trying to gain insight into the very nature of intelligence.
At first, researchers tried to make robots intelligent, loading them with complicated
computer programmes. But that didn’t really work, because the real world is
simply too complex and changeable. Then we considered ants, which are very
successful at what they have to do, even though they don’t have large brains. And
we thought, maybe we should design something simpler — robots that do just a
few tasks. In effect we’ve moved from trying to make them second-rate human
beings to making them particularly sophisticated machines.

And does Jeremy look like a mechanical man, as in all the films?

Far from it. He’s just over a metre tall, and is actually more like a dustbin that can
trundle around than anything else — big, round and black. He has his own
computer on board, and he’s got sensors around his middle, which transmit
pulses of sound to detect any obstacles in his environment. And where you'd
expect his lid, he’s got a video camera. All this input goes into the computer,
which stops him bumping into things.

And can he learn from experience, like humans?

That's one thing we're interested in studying. We have to put him in the same
situation a number of times and get him to choose a behaviour each time. If he
picks the right one, he gets a sort of reward, and if he picks the wrong one he’s
punished. It’s very much like training a dog.

It sounds very human actually, all this talk of reward and punishment. Surely you
can’t talk about robots in the same way as you would talk about a person,
because well they don’t have feelings, do they?

No. No, no, no, they certainly don’t, and we simply use that vocabulary as a sort of
shorthand. Of course notions like reward and punishment are misleading,
because they rather suggest consciousness, which I’m sure that no one working
with computers thinks they have. It'd be better to use terms like ‘reinforce’ and
‘inhibit’, which mean more or less the same, but have different connotations. The
trouble is they're less accessible to the general public.

So how close are we to robots that can do the housework?

Oh, we've still got a long way to go. There is a kind of vacuum cleaner that you
can leave to get on with the job, but of course the trouble is that it doesn’t know
what you want to throw away and what you don't.

Professor Shepherd, thank you.

Thank you.

131


=== Page 137 ===

Test 2 Key

PART 3

Interviewer:

Dr Thompson:

Interviewer:

Dr Thompson:

Interviewer:

Dr Thompson:

132

[pause]

Now you'll hear Part Two again.
tone

[The recording is repeated.}
[pause]

That’s the end of Part Two.
Now turn to Part Three.

[pause]

You will hear an interview with Dr Janet Thompson who spent many years
in Africa, observing chimpanzees. For questions 18 to 22, choose the
answer (A, B, C or D) which fits best according to what you bear.

You now have one minute in which to look at Part Three.
[pause]
tone

Dr Janet Thompson, you made some ground-breaking discoveries about
chimpanzees when you lived with and observed them all those years in Africa. For
example, you were the first to discover, weren't you, that they use tools, like
humans? .

Yes, humans were considered to be the only tool-using species. And | wasn't
looking for anything different. | was just living there in Gombe and observing the
chimpanzees all day every day. And then one day, when | was following one of .
the males, | struggled through a prickly sort of thicket, and found him in a clearing.
| saw he was, very intently, using a long blade of grass to poke into a termite’s
nest, to make it easier for him to get the termites out and eat them. | watched him
doing that several times over the next few days before | realized the significance
of it. Chimpanzees use tools for all sorts of things. Like us, really.

How dangerous has it got on occasions? You must have been frightened of
leopards and lions, for example?

Well, the leopards and other things, when ! first got to Gombe, you know, | could
hear them when | was sleeping out at night but | thought, oh well, and I'd just pull
my little blanket over my head and try to ignore them. They are not really that
dangerous. Usually if they hear you coming, they get out of the way. Of course,
the chimpanzees in the early days, when they lost their fear, they became rather
belligerent. But, in fact, they never have really attacked us.

Pretty dangerous though, and yet you brought up a child in this environment.
Brave or foolhardy? Which is it?

Neither, because Grant was brought up in Gombe when it was really idyllic. There
was — well, danger from the chimpanzees, we had to watch him, but the beach, he
could swim like a littte fish in the lake — it’s clean, pure water. You had to make
sure he didn’t get attacked by lions and things, but it was so free from pollution.
And he /iked being the only little one around. He could get malaria, but you know,
think of the worries in the city today.


=== Page 138 ===

interviewer:

Dr Thompson:

Interviewer:

Dr Thompson:

Interviewer:

PART 4

Derek:
Kathy:
Derek:
Kathy:
Derek:

Kathy:

Test 2 Key

Now tell me about father chimpanzees. They don’t subscribe much to the family
set-up, do they?

They play a very important role actually. They have to protect the territory for the
females and young, from incursion by other males. We now know they patrol and
defend the boundaries, or even enlarge them and get more resources for their
own females and young. It also turns out that males can, when occasion
demands, show really good paternal behaviour and care for orphans. We've seen
it several times.

When you realised you had to leave Gombe, to tell the world about the
chimpanzees’ declining numbers, you left your paradise. But now you do all the
things that are the antithesis of that paradise, travelling and being surrounded by
people, crowds everywhere. How can you bear it when you enjoyed ali those
years of peace?

I think it’s because | feel it’s a mission, and | have to do it. And you know, | had all
those years. How many people are lucky enough to live their dream for so long, to
be in paradise? Life goes through phases and | just suddenly knew that the next
phase was to begin. Once you know you're supposed to be doing something else,
you’re not happy in paradise any more. You know, you can’t change fate.

You remain nevertheless incredibly optimistic about it all though, don’t you? Why?

[pause]

Now you'll hear Part Three again.

tone

[The recording is repeated.]

[pause]

That’s the end of Part Three.

Now turn to Part Four.

[pause]

You'll hear two friends, Kathy and Derek, talking about films based on
19th-century novels. For questions 23 to 28, decide whether the opinions

are expressed by only one of the speakers, or whether the speakers agree.
Write K for Kathy, D for Derek, or B for both, where they agree.

You now have thirty seconds in which to look at Part Four.
[pause]
tone —

Have you seen that new film of Oliver Twist, Kathy?

Yes, | went last night. How about you?

Saw it Monday. Good, isn’t it?

Mm, it made me want to read the novel again.

Me too, but there were so many actors | knew, | couldn't forget who they really
were.

| know what you mean, but | can’t say that worried me. | thought it was great
seeing all those famous people.

133


=== Page 139 ===

Test 2 Key

134

Derek:
Kathy:

Derek:

Kathy:
Derek:

Kathy:

Derek:

Kathy:

Derek:
Kathy:
Derek:
Kathy:

Derek:
Kathy:

Derek:

Kathy:

Derek:

Kathy:

Still, it really brought the world of the novel to life.

Yes, there are so many films based on novels which end up falling between two
stools, neither a good version of the novel nor something original.

You know, it’s interesting how, if you look at some 1930s and 40s films of 19th-
century novels, they're really rooted in the period they were made, in the way
people behaved and related to each other then.

Mm, | suppose so.

And in the last few years, there’s much more effort made to be authentic. Like how
people walk. 19th-century clothes are so different from modern ones that people
had to walk differently, and women were expected to take small steps. But in
some old films the actors moved around as though they were wearing their own
clothes. At least that doesn’t happen so much these days.

But maybe if we saw today’s films again in 20 years’ time, they'd seem just as
dated. It’s because we're so close to them that we can’t see that they’re just as
much reflections of our own time as the 30s films were of theirs. Maybe they
actually show more about us and our values than about the novel that they’re
based on.

Oh, surely directors and actors now are aware of the danger, so they actually try
to get inside the minds of 19th-century people.

Well, we'll see. But you know what disturbs me sometimes is when | know the
novel and have a clear picture of a character, and the actor is just wrong for the
part.

Like when the hero’s supposed to be good-looking and you can’t imagine anyone
falling for him.

There was one film | had to walk out of, because the heroine was played as
neurotic, and there wasn’t a hint of that in the book.

Mm. That sort of thing’s taking artistic licence too far — if you’re going to adapt a
novel, you shouldn't make any major changes to the characters or the plot.
Actually, another thing that struck me is that in films | usually miss the author's
voice.

But he’s sometimes there as an unseen narrator.

Mm, but in the novels the writer's there all the time, in little comments, and in films
they either don’t appear at all, or hardly.

Do we need him at all? People make up their own minds about the characters.
They don't need to be nudged in a particular direction by the author.

Do you think that’s really possible? After all, the author's created the character
and what they do, so we’re manipulated into reacting to them in the way he wants
us to.

Look — suppose he approves of corporal punishment, say, and you don't. You’d
judge a father beating his son differently from the way the author would.

Mm, but maybe it doesn’t matter. Because usually we watch these films as
escapism, don’t we? Not as something to take too seriously.

[pause]
Now you'll hear Part Four again.
tone

[The recording is repeated.]


=== Page 140 ===

Test 2 Key

[pause]
That's the end of Part Four.

There'll now be a pause of five minutes for you to copy your answers onto
the separate answer sheet. Be sure to follow the numbering of all the
questions. I'll remind you when there is one minute left, so that you’re sure
to finish in time.

[pause]
You have one more minute left.
[pause]

That’s the end of the test. Please stop now.

135


=== Page 141 ===

Test 3 Key

Paper1 Reading (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)

1B 2B 3D 4D 5 C 6A 7B 8A
10 D 11 A 12 B 13 B 14C 15 B 16 A
17D 18 D

9C

Part 2. (two marks for each correct answer)
19 B 20 D 21 C 22 B 23 D 24 8B 25 B 26 C

Part 3 (two marks for each correct answer)
27 C 28 H 29 D 30 G 31 F 32 A 33 E

Part 4 (two marks for each correct answer)
34 C 35 D 36 C 37 A 38 B 39 D 40 B

Paper 2 Writing (2 hours)
Task-specific mark schemes

Question 1

Content

Major points:

Discussion of:

© whether or not popular culture places emphasis on the importance of image and
appearance

¢ whether or not this is producing a generation of people who are superficial, self-
centred and materialistic.

Further points:
Relevant examples to agree or disagree with the statement.

Range

Language for expressing and supporting opinions, and for expressing disagreement.
Appropriacy of register and format

Formal letter format. Register appropriate to the writer’s role as reader of a
newspaper writing in to express opinions.

Organisation and cohesion

Clear organisation of points. Adequate use of paragraphing and linking.

Target reader
Would understand the writer’s viewpoint.

136


=== Page 142 ===

Test 3 Key

Question 2

Content

The review should inform the readers about the book, explain the impact the work
had on them as reader (element of personal anecdote is acceptable) and comment
on its appeal for children. 5

Range
Language of description, analysis and evaluation.

Appropriacy of register and format
Register and format appropriate for a review in the Arts Section of a daily
newspaper. Register can be formal/informal, but must be consistent.

Organisation and cohesion
Clear development of ideas. Adequate use of linking and paragraphing.

Target reader

Would be informed about the book and its appeal.

Would be able to decide whether to obtain it for themselves, for their own children
or for children they know.

Question 3

Content

Description of the way of life in the past, with reference to reievant areas sucn as
housing, clothes, food, customs, attitudes, etc.

Reasons for wanting to live at this period of time in the past.

Range

Language of description, analysis and explanation.

Appropriacy of register and format

Register and format appropriate for a magazine article, with possible use of section
headings.

Organisation and cohesion
Clearly organised. Adequate use of linking and paragraphing.

Target reader
Would understand something about the period in history and why it was chosen.

Question 4

Content
Description of sporting and social events, details of future events, and an invitation
to future members.

Range
Language of description, giving information and persuasion.

137


=== Page 143 ===

Test 3 Key

Appropriacy of register and format
Neutral/informal register that is friendly and encouraging in tone. Format
appropriate to that of a report, possibly including section headings.

Organisation and cohesion
Clearly organised presentation of information. Appropriate paragraphing and
linking.

Target reader
Would be well informed about past events, and would be interested in finding out
more about the club and possibly joining.

Question S(a)

Content

Clear reference to the book chosen.

Description and analysis of Macon’s relationship with Muriel, and the reasons why
he returns to her.

Range
Language of description, narrative and analysis.

Appropriacy of register and format
Neutral composition.

Organisation and cohesion
Clear presentation and development of ideas. Appropriate paragraphing and
linking. Clear conclusion.

Target reader
Would understand Muriel’s appeal for Macon, and why he returns to her.

Question 5(b)

Content

Clear reference to the book chosen.

Description of difficulties facing Josella and Bill, and an evaluation of whether the
ending is happy or not.

Range

Language of description, narration and evaluation.

Appropriacy of register and format

Review with register and format appropriate for a magazine. Register must be
consistent throughout.

Organisation and cohesion
Clear development from introduction to development of the main focus, leading to
a clear conclusion.

Target reader
Would be informed about the difficulties facing Josella and Bill, the ending of the
book and the writer’s viewpoint.

138


=== Page 144 ===

Test 3 Key

Question 5(c)

Content

Clear reference to the book chosen.

Description of the portrayal of Hawthorne and the Chief.

Evaluation of their characters and whether or not they should be taken seriously.

Range
Language of description, narration, analysis and evaluation.

Appropriacy of register and format
Consistent and appropriate style for that of a report with possible use of headings.

Organisation and cohesion

Clear presentation and development of ideas, with appropriate linking and
paragraphing. The two parts of the question, description and evaluation, can be
dealt with separately or together. Clear conclusion.

Target reader

Would have a clear understanding of the writer’s viewpoint with regard to whether
or not Hawthorne and the Chief should be portrayed in a serious or humorous
light.

Paper 3 Use of English (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)

1 into 2 may/might/can 3 terms 4 Regardless/regardless /

~ Irrespective/irrespective 5 time 6 at 7 for 8 Being/being
9 so 10 rather 11. result/consequence 12 let 13 What/what
14 this/that 15 however

Part 2 (one mark for each correct answer)

16 disposable 17 indifferent 18 attachment 19 cylindrical
20 intensity 21 basically 22 assertion 23 undoubted
24 exceptional 25 distinctive “

Part 3 (two marks for each correct answer)

26 account 27 hold 28 face 29 rough 30 meet
31 wonder

Part 4 (one mark for each correct section)

32 Ihadn’t been (1) + taken in (1)

33 discussion (of the matter) was (1) + out of the (1)

34 for the ingenuity (1) + of his brother’s (1)

35 with a view (1) + to opening (1)

36 was a sharp/marked/great contrast (1) + between (1)

37 a (very) slim / almost no / little chance (1) + of being given / of getting (1)
38 have a/any clue (1) + (about) how to (1)

39 did George make (1) + a complete recovery from (1)

139


=== Page 145 ===

Test 3 Key

Part 5 (questions 40-43 two marks for each correct answer)

40 (Employee’s) oversights / slips and lapses / mistakes / employees who blunder /
errors (any 2

41 Searching for something or someone to blame for one’s mistakes.

42 They expected a conventional meeting / to be instructed but were required to
use artistic talent / to produce something / they did not expect to be making
masks.

43 She thinks it is relatively uninteresting/unattractive in relation to other
professions.

44 (one mark for each content point, up to ten marks for summary skills)

The paragraph should include the following points:
i don’t punish those who make mistakes
ii reward those who cope with error
iii have systems which can tolerate error
iv encourage creativity / a sense of humour / self-expression

Paper 4 Listening (40 minutes approximately)

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)
1B 2A 3B 4c 5A 6B 7C 8B

Part 2 (one mark for each correct answer)

9 sandy 10 dozen 11 notice(-)boards 12 pruning 13 cereal(s)
14 roots 15 roof(-)tiles / making roofs/roof(-)tiles 16 desert
17 Spanish eagle(s)

Part 3 (one mark for each correct answer)
18 B 19 C 20 A 21 8B 22 C

Part 4 (one mark for each correct answer)
23 L 245 25 B 26 L 27 B 28 S

Transcript Certificate of Proficiency in English Listening Test. Test 3.
I’m going to give you the instructions for this test.

Pll introduce each part of the test and give you time to look at the
questions.

At the start of each piece you'll hear this sound:
tone
You'll hear each piece twice.

Remember, while you're listening, write your answers on the question

paper.

140


=== Page 146 ===

PART 1

Extract 1

Interviewer:
Margot:
Interviewer:
Margot:
Interviewer:

Margot:

Extract 2

Interviewer:

Test 3 Key

You'll have five minutes at the end of the test to copy your answers onto the
separate answer sheet.

There will now be a pause. Please ask any questions now, because you must
not speak during the test.

[pause]
Now open your question paper and look at Part One.

[pause]

You'll hear four different extracts. For questions 1 to 8, choose the answer
(A, B or C) which fits best according to what you hear. There are two
questions for each extract.

[pause]
tone

So, how do you get the fish in the first place? Do you buy them or breed them
here?

No, | don’t rely on anyone else, I’m thankfully self-sufficient in juveniles, the young
ones, because | breed my own fish here as this enables me to give full details of
the fishes’ origins to customers. They expect that.

Which part of the whole process do you enjoy most?

Really, product development is my baby, and one has to put one’s mind to that
continuously. It’s crucial.

The marketing skill that you've developed here with your fish — would that be
transferable to beef, sheep ...?

Well, | think it’s a mindset, isn’t it? To my mind, producing fish is fantastic, it’s a
great satisfaction to do it properly, but you know, what's the point of producing a
wondertul fish if you haven't got a profitable sale at the end of the day? | think it
comes down to providing a top quality service for your clients. And | must say,
that’s really what | enjoy. That's what keeps me here. ©

[pause]

tone

[The recording is repeated. ]
[pause]

[pause]

tone

So, did you feel, when you started publishing, that women were treated differently
from men, by critics, for example?

141


=== Page 147 ===

Test 3 Key

Novelist: It never crossed my mind, so confident was | that | could do it. | think if you start
counting the low numbers of reviews and contributors to literary journals, you do
get a rather dismal answer. But that didn’t worry me. And | think one of the
reasons was that writing novels is, for a woman, the best choice to make. There
was a long tradition behind you. Had | chosen other forms of literary endeavour
like drama, which | did have a go at and failed, it would have been very different.
There was a huge gap in England between Aphra Behn, the infamous woman
playwright of the sixteenth century, and the next really successful woman
dramatist, Caryl Churchill, in the 1960s! | was very conscious in drama of not
exactly an establishment, but all sorts of things | couldn’t cope with or got
frustrated by. The novel was uniquely the sphere in which you felt you had equal
billing.

[pause]
tone
[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]
Extract 3 [pause]
tone

Presenter: | haven't read the Inspector Rebus books myself. What's he like?
Actor: Well, he’s kind of concerned about his place within the world. He’s quite ...
Presenter: He’s a thinker.

Actor: Yeah, in the way that we all are. We think, what on earth’s going on? How can this
happen? Am | part of the problem, or in some way part of the solution? What am |
doing to change that? And in a very sort of introspective way | think he tries to
resolve his own life issues by dealing with them externally.

Presenter: He’s a bit of an independent thinker, an eccentric, then?

Actor: Well, yes. But that’s probably because, as an individual, he’s concerned with what
is happening to him and to the world, and | think being a cop is often, in some
sense, a kind of, a kind of pursuit, theoretical or psychological, trying to
understand the world that he lives in, through trying to understand the events that
happen around him. So he’s anti the authorities in general, certainly, but | think
he’s probably just more aware of his personal responsibility for his own existence
than — than simply eccentric.

[pause]
tone
[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]
Extract 4 [pause]

tone

142


=== Page 148 ===

Speaker:

PART 2

Presenter:

Roger:

Test 3 Key

What's strange about pop music is that it usually has a clear function. The function
of the music of the 1940s and 50s was to soothe and to bring romance back into
life. In the sixties the function was simply to help young people to make the
transition from adolescence to adulthood. That was all it was about. It provided a
self-contained therapy, which had never been necessary before. This rite of
passage had always been eased by society, by the military system, by the
academic, by the post industrial revolution machinery. By the end of the fifties the
young had shaken themselves free of all that, they had to look after themselves
and the popular culture reflected that. We forget that before the 1960s young
people generally aspired to be like their parents in styles of dress, work, even
leisure. Then, suddenly the rebellious independent teenager was born. It was a
totally new concept, which initially shook the older generation to the core as youth
took over and revolutionised fashion, lifestyle, travel and, of course, morals.

{pause]

tone

(The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

That’s the end of Part One.

Now turn to Part Two.

[pause]

You'll bear a lecture on the cork forests of southern Spain and Portugal. For
questions 9 to 17, complete the sentences with a word or short phrase.

You now have forty-five seconds in which to look at Part Two.
[pause]
tone

Good morning. Today’s lecture is about the humble cork. And here to tell us about
it is cork farmer, Roger Reynard.

Thank you. Well let’s start by establishing what cork is exactly. We all know it as
the light spongy substance used for covering food and drink in bottles and jars.
Fewer people know that it comes from the bark of a pretty little oak tree which,
surprisingly, requires sandy soil to thrive. | have been farming cork in the more
barren areas of southern Spain and Portugal for 20 years and am proud of the fact
that our area produces 85% of the world’s supply and also contributes to the
maintenance of an ancient agricultural eco-system.

Let’s have a look at a picture of a typical cork forest. As you can see, the trees
have a distinct, crusty bark. Every nine years, during the months of May, June,
July and August, the outer layer is stripped off. Cork can be collected from a tree
as many as a dozen times in its productive life. In its processing, the cork is firstly
seasoned in giant stacks and then, after that, it’s boiled for an hour or more. It is
then graded for its quality: a top quality cork will fetch ten times more than a
cheaper grade which is harder and has more knobs on it, so it would be used not
for jar and bottle stoppers but for shoe soles, roof tiling and, principally, ‘

143


=== Page 149 ===

Test 3 Key

144

noticeboards — these don’t have to have the flexibility and smoothness we expect
in an expensive cork. So it’s a resource which has many uses, though, of course,
it is best known as a cover or stopper on food and drink containers. It’s this use
which gets the best returns for us farmers and enables the cork forests to be
maintained. Quality therefore has to be every cork farmer's aim and this is
sustained by correct levels of fertilisation, but most importantly, suitable pruning,
because this allows the trees to spread and therefore flourish.

As | indicated earlier, these forests have been growing for as long as 2,000
years and this ancient environment has developed a thriving eco-system with
healthy bio-diversity. As you can see from the picture, cereals are sown between
the rows of trees, helping to maintain the soils. Going back to the tree, of course,
you do not only reap the cork bark; acorns from the tree are also valuable in these
traditional agricultural systems, used for feed for animals such as sheep, which
graze on the adjacent scrub-land.

This system is the product of a web which has been slowly spun over many
years. What might bring it to an end is something called TCA, or to give it its full
name two-four-six-trichloranysol. Tiny traces of this occasionally cause foods and
drink to taste musty. No one knows for sure how it gets into cork and this is why a
solution to the problem is such a long time coming. | have a theory about it
though: that it comes from the roots of different species of trees growing near the
cork oaks. I’m pleased to say | have managed to persuade the local Cork Growers
Association to cut the affected section of all trees grown in our area and send it for
use in roof tiles, where the toxicity is not problematic.

| suggest that these measures should be instituted in all cork growing areas
very soon because, although some people are aware of the threat, others feel
that, with TCA, plastic will replace cork entirely. But this decline of the cork
industry in the south of Spain and Portugal will then lead to the loss of cork forests
and turn the land into a desert. Not only will it wipe out an ancient crop but also
the environment which supports a myriad of unique species, most notably the
Spanish eagle. Cork is one of the few products which maintains the delicate
ecological balance of this fragile environment and many people feel its survival is
worth fighting for.

[pause]

Now you'll hear Part Two again.
tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

That’s the end of Part Two.
Now turn to Part Three.

[pause]


=== Page 150 ===

PART 3

Interviewer:

Caroline:

Interviewer:

Caroline:

Interviewer:

Caroline:

Interviewer:

Caroline:

Interviewer:

Caroline:

Test 3 Key

You'll hear part of a radio programme about a group of people on an
expedition to the South Pole. For questions 18 to 22, choose the answer
(A, B, C or D) which fits best according to what you hear.

You now have one minute in which to look at Part Three.
[pause]
tone

| caught up with the all-woman team as they rested in their tent about 350
kilometres away from the South Pole. The expedition started in November. They
walk about 40 kilometres a day pulling sledges laden with their supplies and
equipment. | asked Caroline, the team leader, to describe what life was like.

Well, the sun is shining, there’s a beautiful blue sky, but it’s very cold. It’s about
minus 25 degrees Centigrade. We've got stacks of underwear and a large sort of
poncho and dungarees which keep us very warm; hat, hood and then a face mask
as well, which is vital to keep the wind out. There are five of us together and we
go along in single file so there isn’t much chance of a conversation.

Isn't it a very lonely experience?

Well, it gives us time to daydream and it’s also incredibly beautiful, so there’s lots
to look at and we do need to concentrate very hard, one foot in front of the other in
order to keep momentum going. We've all got big heavy sledges behind us and so
the sledges pull on you and they get caught in ridges and things, and so you've
got to keep fighting against your sledge to make sure you keep moving along.
Two years ago when you organised the first female expedition to the North Pole,
obviously that was an arduous task that you had. How does it compare with this
one?

It's obviously harder because we're going the whole distance. Last time it was a
relay and | was on the last leg of the relay, for instance, and did 160 kilometres.
This time it’s over a thousand.

Now during the last expedition, | think it was Pom Oliver who did falt through the
ice and dislocate her shoulder, have you had any hairy moments this time?

Well crevasses, we’ve come up against, you know, incredibly deep cracks in the
ice, we’ve had to negotiate our way around them. The first time we had that, it was
a bit hairy, especially in a white-out of snow when you can’t see anything; then
there was an occasion a couple of days ago when we heard rumblings coming up
from beneath the ice, and a lot of banging and crashing below which was, | found
very unnerving.

| know that you're working a lot because of travelling so far every day and
obviously you're pitching your tent every day. How is the practical work of getting
your tent up for the night done?

We all put up the tent together and we've got a routine where we all know which
pole we put in. We put the inner tent in. Then Pom goes in because we've made a
3 millimetre floor on the bottom of the tent to keep it warm and obviously to keep
our feet warm. So we all work together as a team to get it up but the cooker’s on
as quick as we can. And as soon as everyone’s in hopefully by then the hot
water’s boiling and we can have hot soup and cheese — without that I’d be dead
on my feet.

145


=== Page 151 ===

Test 3 Key

Interviewer:
Caroline:

Interviewer:

Caroline:

PART 4

146

Louise:

Stephen:

Louise:

And do you always sleep well?

As soon as our heads touch the sleeping bags we’re out cold. We always get our
full eight hours’ sleep and the next thing you know the alarm is going off.

Now, Caroline, earlier this week, I’m sure you’re aware of this, another team
reached the South Pole before you. Has this been demoralising for you and your
team?

No, not at all. It’s just one of those things. I’m really thrilled that they’ve got there.
We know them and their guide a bit, and we’ve spoken to them a few times on the
journey, so we knew that they were nearly there. We’ve done the North Pole. We
want to do the South Pole. We’re all women, the first all women British expedition.
The other expedition was not at all the same in its nature; it was a mixed group,
commercially organised. So no hard feelings at all.

[pause]

Now you'll hear Part Three again.
tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

That’s the end of Part Three.
Now turn to Part Four.

[pause]

You'll hear part of a radio programme in which two people, Louise and
Stephen, discuss a film they have recently seen. For questions 23 to 28,
decide whether the opinions are expressed by only one of the speakers, or
whether the speakers agree. Write L for Louise, S for Stephen, or B for
both, where they agree.

You now have thirty seconds in which to look at Part Four. co
[pause]
tone

Well, Stephen, the new film directed by John Bernard, Life in America, | think the
thing that really amazes me about this film is that it got made by a major studio at
all, because the film pokes fun at almost everything that corporate and suburban
America hold dear — you know, a nice life, material wealth, self-help philosophy. It
really sends up almost everything you can think of and it does it very well!

| was less enraptured, Louise. To me it seemed too well-trodden a path to involve
much irony and, let’s face it, it was extraordinarily pedestrian. Visually as well,
although there were some very lovely moments, it seemed rather trite, which | was
amazed by.

Hmm, do you mean like when we kept on seeing those young girls covered in
rose petals from the garden ... pedestrian is going too far, though. The treatment
seemed to be that of a young director enamoured like a kid with the process of
film making, and | don’t think that’s a bad thing. | think he’s got a great enthusiasm
and passion and probably a great film career ahead of him.


=== Page 152 ===

Stephen:

Louise:

Stephen:

Louise:

Stephen:

Louise:

Test 3 Key

Well, that goes without saying. But | think if you go to this film with huge
expectations, you can only be disappointed. But at the same time there’s so much
that’s humorous, there are a number of new and subtle twists on perennial
themes.

The core of the subject matter is certainly familiar, but this film does look at some
aspects from a different angle. | mean | particularly liked the way the

father / daughter relationship developed. And | really think it does have its sublime
moments.

Do you? | tell you what | think is really interesting and subversive about this film.
At one point it looks as if you’re going to have a happy ending involving serious
crime, and | couldn't believe that a mainstream American movie was going to
suggest that crime was a good way to get out of your problems.

It almost does as a matter of fact. And, come to think of it, we don’t get the usual
reassuring moral message reinforced in the final moments as we’re left sort of
suspended.

Hmm, it’s an interesting idea. Everybody comes out of the cinema trying to work
out how it will all wind up. But what's so wonderful about this film is the camera
work. Young directors often use the power and energy of the camera to get a
kinetic sense of excitement. This film is amazingly processional and calm and you
get these wonderful slow movements which open up your heart at times.

Mmm, | see what you mean, though a little more tension might have enhanced the
balance of the whole, although it would have to be judiciously added ...

[pause]

Now you'll bear Part Four again.
tone

[The recording is repeated. ]
[pause]

That’s the end of Part Four.

There'll now be a pause of five minutes for you to copy your answers onto
the separate answer sheet. Be sure to follow the numbering of all the
questions. I'll remind you when there is one minute left, so that you're sure
to finish in time.

[pause]
You have one more minute left.

[pause]
That’s the end of the test. Please stop now.

147


=== Page 153 ===

Test 4 Key

Paper 1 Reading (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)

1C 2B 3B 4c SA 6D 7C 8
10 C 11 A 12 B 13 D 14 A 15 Cc 16
17 B 18 D

Part 2 (two marks for each correct answer)
19 B 20 D 21 C 22 A 23 C 24 A 25 A 26 D

Part 3. (two marks for each correct answer)
27 E 28 F 29H 30 G 31 A 32 D 33 C

Part 4 (two marks for each correct answer)
34.€ 35 B 36 C 37 A 38 D 39 D 40 D

Paper 2) Writing (2 hours)
Task-specific mark schemes

Question 1

Content

Major points:

The following points will need addressing:

¢ books in competition with TV and computers, and perhaps becoming less
popular

¢ books providing a unique pleasure

¢ books as convenient and just as rewarding as TV or computers.

Further points:
Popularity of video rather than books.
Other reasons why people read books.

Range
Language for expressing and supporting opinions, and for defending or attacking an
argument, depending on individual viewpoint.

Appropriacy of register and format
Register appropriate to the writer’s role as reader of a newspaper submitting an
article for a media magazine. Article may make use of headings.

Organisation and cohesion
Clear development of argument. Adequate use of linking and paragraphing.

148


=== Page 154 ===

Test 4 Key

Target reader
Would understand the writer’s viewpoint.

Question 2

Content
Range of reasons for wanting to take part.
Speculation about what they would hope to learn from the experience.

Range
Language of description (e.g. personal qualities), persuasion and speculation.

Appropriacy of register and format
Formal or neutral register (though must be consistent) and format appropriate for
a letter to a television company.

Organisation and cohesion
Clear organisation and development of ideas with appropriate linking and
paragraphing.

Target reader
TV producers would be interested in having this person in the programme.

Question 3

Content
Relative merits of dinner, disco, concert and other ideas.
Recommendation of the best idea.

Range
Language of recommendation and persuasive argument.

Appropriacy of register and format
Register and format appropriate for a proposal with possible use of headings.
Register can be neutral/informal, but must be consistent.

Organisation and cohesion
Clearly organised treatment of each suggestion and other ideas. Final
recommendation must be clearly expressed decision.

Target reader
Would know exactly what was recommended and why.

Question 4

Content

Description of scenes/narrative elements of films.

Explanation of what makes the film funny / different types of humour.
Reasons for recommending the film for the award.

Range
Language of description, narration, contrast and recommendation.

Appropriacy of register and format
Register and format appropriate for a review in a film magazine.

149


=== Page 155 ===

Test 4 Key

Organisation and cohesion
Clear development of narrative detail and description. Appropriate paragraphing
and linking. Clear conclusion.

Target reader
Would be interested in seeing the film and understand why it is funny and
successful.

Question S(a)

Content

Clear reference to the book chosen.

Description and analysis of the character and importance of the dog, Edward.
Evaluation of the statement and whether or not it is true for this novel.

Range
Language of description, narration and evaluation.

Appropriacy of register and format
Formal letter.

Organisation and cohesion

Clear presentation and development of ideas with appropriate linking of
paragraphs from the introduction to the main body of the letter and the
conclusion.

Target reader
Would understand the writer’s viewpoint with regard to whether a dog can have a
significant role in a novel for adults.

Question 5(b)

Content

Clear reference to the book chosen.

Comparison of Tynsham and Shirning, with a description of the people and the
way they live their lives there.

Evaluation of the effect these places and people have on Bill Masen.

Range
Language of description, narration, comparison and evaluation.

Appropriacy of register and format
Neutral composition.
Organisation and cohesion

Clear presentation and development of ideas. Appropriate paragraphing and
linking. Clear conclusion.

Target reader
Would have a clear idea of what both places were like, how the occupants felt
about living there, and how they affect Bill Masen.

150


=== Page 156 ===

Test 4 Key

Question 5(c)

Content

Close reference to the book chosen.

Description and comparison of Hawthorne’s views on service to one’s country, and
Worniold’s views on loyalty to one’s friends.

Range

Language of description, narration, comparison and evaluation.
Appropriacy of register and format

Neutral composition.

Organisation and cohesion

Clear presentation and development of ideas. Appropriate paragraphing and
linking. Clear conclusion.

Target reader
Would have a clear idea of the attitudes of both characters.

Paper 3 Use of English (1 hour 30 minutes)

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)

1 It/it 2 to 3 sooner 4 order 5 Should/should 6 run/face
7 come 8 Given/given 9 without 10a 11 will

12 this/it/she 13 anything/anyone/anybody 14 if NOT when

15 despite/in

Part 2 (one mark for each correct answer)

16 necessarily 17 reluctance 18 characteristic 19 likelihood
20 presumably 21 significance 22 insecurity 23 appreciative
24 unaware 25 loneliness

Part 3 (two marks for each correct answer)

26 turn 27 steps 28 picture 29 admission 30 faint
31 capital

Part 4 (one mark for each correct section)

32 to (a/the) popular belief (1) + not all (1)

33. shyness was due to (1) + (a/his) lack (1)

34 believe his luck (1) + when he (NOT had) (1)

35 nowhere (1) + until / but then / then John came up with (1)

36 lacks awareness (1) + when it (1)

37 take the clock apart (1) + unless (1)

38 broken thumb / injury to his thumb / thumb injury (1) + affect his ability (1)
39 she had not / hadn’t (1) + turned down (1)

151


=== Page 157 ===

Test 4 Key ”

Part 5 (questions 40-43 two marks for each correct answer)
40 spontaneity may be eliminated / performers may not perform well / music may
no longer be ‘great’
41 any paraphrase of ‘peculiar temperament’ / a solitary/strange personality
42 He is not distracted by what is happening around him.
43 minor flaws
44 (up to four marks for content points, up to ten marks for summary skills)
The paragraph should include the following points:
i More than one interpretation of music is possible.
ii more spontaneity/emotion at a live concert
iii You get a feel for the personality of the performers.
iv the interaction the performers have with the audience and vice versa
v You can be oblivious to imperfections.

Paper 4 Listening (40 mimutes approximately)

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)
1A 2C 3B 4c SA 6B 7C 8B

Part 2 (one mark for each correct answer)
9 misconception/misapprehension (NOT belief/conviction/mistake)

10 (pressure) wave 11. brain 12 location/position
13 hunter (for food) 14 (if there is) (any) distress (NOT crying)
15 (the moment of) birth 16 washing machine (sound/noise)

17 letters of complaint / complaints / reports

Part 3 (one mark for each correct answer)
18 B 19 C 20 A 21 D 22 B

Part 4 (one mark for each correct answer)
23 S$ 24S 25 B 26 S 27 T 28 T

Transcript Certificate of Proficiency in English Listening Test. Test 4.
I’m going to give you the instructions for this test.

Vl introduce each part of the test and give you time to look at the
questions.

At the start of each piece you'll hear this sound:
tone
You'll hear each piece twice.

Remember, while you’re listening, write your answers on the question
y §:

paper.

152


=== Page 158 ===

PART 1

Extract 1

Speaker:

Extract 2

Speaker:

Test 4 Key

You'll have five minutes at the end of the test to copy your answers onto the
separate answer sheet.

There will now be a pause. Please ask any questions now, because you must
not speak during the test.

[pause]
Now open your question paper and look at Part One.

[pause]

You'll hear four different extracts. For questions 1 to 8, choose the answer
(A, B or C) which fits best according to what you hear. There are two
questions for each extract.

[pause]
tone

ls wordplay at the heart of the English language? Before | started looking at this |
would have laughed to scorn the idea that wordplay was anything more than a
playground activity that children delight in or part of a comedian’s patter. The more
| go into it the more | find. It is in fact an integral part of the way the language
works and forms much of what constitutes communication.

And | am reminded of the 19th century writer George Eliot who said ‘a different
taste in jokes places a great strain on the affections’. And there is a great truth
here — that people who really bond well together enjoy each other's wordplay,
whatever it is, whether it’s a pun or a joke. And when the day comes that
somebody in a relationship says ‘Why are you always making those stupid
jokes?’, we know it won't last much longer. So wordplay, it seems to me, can be
an immensely serious business at times.

[pause]

tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

[pause]

tone

Many actors say that doing the voices for animated films is the hardest acting job
they have ever done, because when they come into the recording studio there's
nothing around them: no costumes, no actors, no special lighting, and yet they do
a remarkable job. As director, ! go in and describe to them the set, the other
characters, what kind of noises there are going to be, and | try to paint a picture in
their minds and then | let them go.

153


=== Page 159 ===

Test 4 Key

Extract 3

Interviewer:

Extract 4

154

Presenter:

Interviewee:

Presenter:
Interviewer:

We video tape each of our recording sessions for the animators because what
the actors do in front of a microphone with their facial expressions and their hand
gestures is so remarkable that the animators get inspired by it. They don’t copy it
directly, but they get inspired by it to the point where each of the actors that does
the voice for one of our characters, when they see the final movie, they'll say,
‘That's me, | never knew | was like a toy cowboy’, but it is them, because there is
so much of them in the gestures and the expressions.

[pause]

tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

[pause]

tone

As an eminent environmentalist, you have devoted your life to this subject and |
haven't, but nevertheless | have tried to find some evidence which contradicts
your views; because I’m worried about how you can know so much about what's
going to happen in a hundred years’ time, and I’m worried about the way you
support your argument. You say things have come and gone, repeated
themselves over the last few thousand years, but your statistics only go back a
hundred years, so what are you measuring it against? That worries me. | came
across this article by Peter Dennis and he agrees with much of what you say, but
between 900 and 1300 AD, the earth’s temperature rose by 4 to 7 degrees
Fahrenheit, very close to your predictions of this 21st century. It was one of the
most favourable periods in human history. The population actually boomed, food
production expanded, there was a surplus of workers and energy, colossal
buildings were required and built, minerals were mined, the deserts retreated,
etc., etc. So in those years he has evidence that things got massively better for
people ...

[pause]

tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

[pause]

tone

So, Pauline, were you laughed at in the playground when you were playing
football?

Not at all, actually. The best player in my primary school was a girl. So no
problems with that.

And how many girls at university played football?

Well, at university we just had the one women’s team. It was very informal, it was
just a social thing. If you wanted to play seriously, you had to go off and finda
league to join.


=== Page 160 ===

Presenter:
Interviewee:

PART 2

Speaker:

Test 4 Key

How do you think more women could be encouraged to join the game?

We must show people good strong role models. This myth about women not being
able to play football, we need to get rid of that. We need to say yes, we can
succeed in the game. And also the families need to see that it’s a career their
child can take. For a boy who wants to make it at the top level, that’s a career
choice, and | suppose parents think of football as a hobby for a girl, not a career. If
they see it’s an option for them, it'll work.

[pause]
tone

[The recording is repeated.]

[pause]
That’s the end of Part One.

Now turn to Part Two.

[pause]

You'll hear part of a radio programme about the sense of hearing. For
questions 9 to 17, complete the sentences with a word or short phrase.

You now have forty-five seconds in which to look at Part Two.
[pause]
tone

Today I’m going to look at the sense of hearing, one of those senses that can fade
with age. In general, provided that we don't know of a problem with our hearing,
we tend to assume that we all hear the same thing. But, in fact, this seems to be a
misconception because men and women are increasingly claiming that there are
disparities in what they hear. So are they right? Do men and women have different
auditory experiences? Here’s how it all works. Sound meets the outer ear, which
has the form of a funnel. The sound passes through this to the eardrum. Then
three tiny bones send what is known as a pressure wave down to the inner ear
where the sound message is encoded. Finally, in a fraction of a second, the
information passes up through the auditory nerve to the brain and we realise that
we've heard a sound.

The most fascinating thing about the inside of the ear is that a part that
measures three millimetres in a child of ten will also measure three millimetres in
a very tall adult. But can men and women’s hearing vary despite this uniformity?
An Australian biologist Alan Treece is adamant that they can. He believes that
men are better at discerning the location of a sound than women. Thus, he
suggests that if you wake a man up and there’s a dog howling in the distance,
most men can generally point to where the sound is coming from. The original
purpose would seem to be that in prehistoric times, man, as the hunter, had to
chase wild animals for food. It therefore made sense that he could hear sounds in
the distance and was able to identify where they originated from so that he could
catch his prey. Treece is also convinced that women are genetically programmed

155


=== Page 161 ===

Test 4 Key

PART 3

156

Presenter:

to hear crying babies, a handy excuse perhaps for all those men who would rather
stay in bed than attend to a screaming infant! Treece puts it down to the fact that
women hear better than men in terms of distinguishing high-pitched sounds. He
links this to the fact that women as the child bearers need the ability to hear if
there is any distress coming from the child. But it does seem that when the role of
carer is reversed, men are mysteriously equally good at hearing their offspring.

So what's the scientific truth behind such ideas? Do men and women really
differ in their hearing? An ongoing study at Cambridge University shows that some
differences have been found. By putting a tiny microphone inside the ear it has
been possible to measure that women’s hearing is slightly better than men’s. And
this difference is observable from the moment of birth. Other studies have shown
that the right ear tends to be better than the left.

One mysterious difference between the sexes was highlighted recently when a
number of women in Manchester started hearing strange sounds, which their
husbands simply couldn't. The sound is a low continuous noise similar to that
which a washing machine makes. It is less noticeable at some times than it is at
others. For some reason it seems to be very loud at the weekends, during the
night. The sufferers hear this noise when they go to bed and it prevents them from
going to sleep. Some say that the sound seems to be piercing their heads. The
local council has failed to work out what the sounds can be. What is really
intriguing is that all the complaints sent in to the Council offices so far have been
from women. No man seems to be able to hear it. So | hope that this has given
you a preliminary insight into the mysterious world of sound. | will look at some
further research projects in this area in my next talk ... .

[pause]

Now you'll hear Part Two again.

tone

[The recording is repeated.|

[pause]

That’s the end of Part Two.

Now turn to Part Three.

[pause]

You'll bear a book reviewer on a radio programme about science discussing

a book about the human brain. For questions 18 to 22, choose the answer
(A, B, C or D) which fits best according to what you hear.

You now have one minute in which to look at Part Three.
[pause]
tone

And now here’s Peter Hughes with our regular book review feature. Peter, what
have you been reading this week?


=== Page 162 ===

Peter:
Presenter:
Peter:
Presenter:
Peter:

Presenter:
Peter:

Presenter:
Peter:

Presenter:

Peter:

Presenter:
Peter:

Presenter:

Peter:

Presenter:

Peter:

Test 4 Key

It's a book called Mapping the mind, which is about research into the human brain.
Neuroscience?

That's right. Until recently, we couldn’t directly examine what was going on in the
brain. But nowadays new imaging techniques make all this visible.

Like X-rays revealing our bones?

Exactly. In this case mapping means locating the precise brain activity that
creates particular experiences and behaviours. It’s a fascinating subject, because
neuroscience is revealing a great deal about our actions.

Let’s have some examples of how brain activity affects our behaviour.

Well, we can now identify how electrical activity in different parts of the brain
causes feelings of anger, violence, kindness, self-awareness, and so on. For
instance one area of the brain lights up when we register a joke, and a different
area glows dully when we recall an unhappy memory.

Does this change our view of personality?

It certainly does. We're finding out that the thoughts and emotions that make up
our personalities reflect biological mechanisms, suggesting that our personalities
are actually formed by what goes on in our brains.

Which sounds like a very important discovery.

Yes, both practically and socially. For one thing, it paves the way for us to contro!
brain activity quite precisely. Compare it with what we're learning about the body,
about how the DNA sequences that we have in our genes can make one person
fat, for instance, and another suffer from a certain illness. We’re beginning to be
able to do something to treat those conditions, through genetic engineering.

Can we modify both the brain and the body?

Not just yet, but it won't be that long till they’re both possible. Though according to
the author, control of the brain is probably nearer, because unlike human genetic
engineering, it doesn’t depend on the development of tricky new technology. All it
needs is a little refinement of existing methods and techniques, like drugs and
surgery, which at the moment are rather hit-and-miss. But it won't be long before
we can target treatments precisely enough to control an individual's state of mind
— and that will affect their behaviour.

It’s surprising how little we hear about the potential uses of neuroscientists’ work,
considering that it's such a new field and they're already at the leading edge of
scientific research.

And scientific findings are normally hyped, in the scramble for funding. Yes, it’s
partly because neuroscientists have come into the discipline from many different
fields, and they’re so busy charting brain functions that they haven’t yet developed
a group mentality or a consensus about their long-term purpose. And of course,
many of them are terrified of the scrutiny and government control that might result
from tabloid publicity, so they're happy to keep a low profile.

It's rather ironic, isn’t it, that while we're all terribly concerned about genetic
engineering, we hear so little about brain mapping.

Yes, it tends to be regarded as ‘interesting for those who like that sort of thing, but
of no practical importance’.

157


=== Page 163 ===

Test 4 Key

Presenter:
Peter:

Presenter:
Peter:

Presenter:
Peter:

PART 4

158

Presenter:

Tanya/Sam:
Presenter:

Sam:

Tanya:

ws

And is that where this book comes in?

Mmm. The author wants to open up the debate on the implications of this
research, both for society and for our understanding of consciousness. She
focuses on brain mapping, although, as she points out, this is only one part of the
picture: there are also the extremely complex interactions of the brain’s various
parts, which she's only touched on. And | wish she'd given us at least an overview
of discoveries in that area.

Finally, Peter, who is this book for?

Well, it’s an exploration of virgin territory, that deals with a complex subject clearly
and without dumbing it down. People who prefer to travel only on well-worn paths
should wait for the tourist guides that'll be along later. But those who enjoy
exploring will discover some strange and wonderful things here.

Peter Hughes, thank you.

Thank you.

[pause]

Now you'll hear Part Three again.
tone

[The recording is repeated.]
[pause]

That’s the end of Part Three.
Now turn to Part Four.

[pause]

You'll bear part of a radio programme in which two writers, Tanya and
Sam, discuss writing. For questions 23 to 28, decide whether the opinions
are expressed by only one of the speakers, or whether the speakers agree.
Write T for Tanya, S for Sam, or B for both, where they agree.

You now have thirty seconds in which to look at Part Four.
[pause]

tone

Today we have two writers in the studio. Welcome, Tanya Tallis and Sam
Whateley.

Hello.

Sam, it’s sometimes said that writers as a group have more in common than they
diverge. What's your opinion on this?

One of the things | think you can safely say about writers is that our driving force
is the itch for fame and recognition.

! think if anything we're a neurotic lot driven by our internal demons. | mean, every
writer | know seems to be this lethal combination of sometimes coming on far too
strong, and at others acting like a frightened rabbit. Though | wouldn't be
surprised if both stem from the same demon of insecurity.


=== Page 164 ===

Sam:

Tanya:
Sam:

Tanya:

Sam:

Tanya:

Sam:

Tanya:

Sam:

Tanya:
Sam:
Tanya:

Sam:

Presenter:

Sam/Tanya:

Test 4 Key

That's rather a generalisation, isn’t it? | know what you mean about coming on too
strong, and it is often to compensate for something. Though don’t you need to be
pretty sure of yourself to assert yourself on paper? After all, why should people
want to read my thoughts on whatever?

I'd call it a need to write, rather than a need to be read, and that hardly comes
from being sure of yourself.

Well, another thing we have in common is our uncertainty about the business side
of things. That’s all we talk about when we get together.

Mn, it’s all grumbles about publishers, editors and so on. In fact | tend to avoid
congregations of writers purely because you get so much whingeing, and often it
just gets you more steamed up.

You do get plenty of that. | try to sift through it to find out which editors are
supportive and which ones to avoid. And anyway, often it’s very difficuit for a
writer to know how much to charge for a particular piece of work, and unless you
talk to other writers, you can't find out the going rate.

But don’t you think what's maddening about the term ‘writer’ is that anyone can be
one? You know, it’s not like hairdressing. | mean, | don’t think, if ’m short of a few
quid, ‘Oh, I'll go and cut a few people's hair, I’m sure I'll make a reasonable fist of
it,’ but any old superannuated celebrity or politician can pick up a pen and get
away with it.

Don't you think though that people realise that, let’s call it ‘real literature’, is ina
different league from a celeb’s ghosted tripe? They know there’s an awful lot of
craft involved in writing, and it takes years to learn it.

But do we want literature to be, if you like, all craft and no inspiration? Surely
inspiration is paramount.

Of course you need the germ of the idea that you want to develop in the first
place, but | wouldn't underestimate the technique side of things. | can think of two
or three novels based on very banal concepts that've been turned into something
quite stunning.

So have you got anything up your sleeve to ‘stun’ us with?

Um...

Oh come on, we all know we should keep our cards close to our chests, but being
writers we need to bounce our ideas off someone.

Well I've Known so many people who've had their ideas ripped off. You know, they
bob up in other people’s work if you share them, and mos: of us have learnt from
that now.

There I’m afraid we must stop, because it’s time for the news. Thank you both
very much indeed.

Thank you.

[pause]

Now you'll hear Part Four again.
tone

(The recording is repeated.]

[pause]

159


=== Page 165 ===

Test 4 Key

That’s the end of Part Four.

There'll now be a pause of five minutes for you to copy your answers onto
the separate answer sheet. Be sure to follow the numbering of all the
questions, I'll remind you when there is one minute left, so that you're sure
to finish in time.

[pause]
You have one more minute left.
[pause]

That’s the end of the test. Please stop now.

160


=== Page 166 ===

Sample answer sheet: Paper 1

UNIVERSITY of CAMBRIDGE
Local Examinations Syndicate

SAM PLE

= =
Candidate Name Centre No.
{fot already printed write name
in CAPITALS and completa the
Canclidate No. grid fin perc)
Candidate's signature Candidate No.
— 210)0).0) om
Examination Title Examination cc
Details 2/2/22
Centre BB) 3} BR) ee
ALAA) A ee
Supervisor: 5, | 5) BB
6] 6) 6) 6) ee
if the candidte is ABSENT or has WITHDRAWN shade here <> Bd) 2d
BB) 8) 8) oe
213) 313

Candidate Answer Sheet

Instructions For example, if you think B is the right
Use a soft PENCIL(B or HB) answer, mark your answer sheet in pencil
. like this:

k each stion. — Rub out any answer you
Mark ONE letter only for each questi fo a fc 2) wish fo change.

Part 1 | Part 2 |

4 8 £2 jf & £ 2 A £2
2|4 2 £ 2 eA 2 £ 8 A 2 2
34 8 aA & € 2 A £2
4[A 8 aA 8 £ 8 ES £2
s|A & ag 2 £ 2 AS € 2
aja aA & £ 2 A ££ 2
hr a ne ——t |
7/4 8 aA 2 £ 2 Ags 8
{4 8 aA & fF BI

gj- 3

8
PHP >>] > >i ]>
0) co} ] co} oo} ] wo] mo)
olfallolpofJolle|foe
ooJoojoolo
mi jm jm) lm] mi jemi
Oyo loa lo lafa/la
(xifixjj= =|0=\0=|0=

Drm O7 404107

17

Lol] oJ oo ]o})ojjajjofja

)>|1>
loffoiloooeoeofooollofolfolle je
JONSON Sopo ooo olopopoyoojoje

Slo

g

E}

wo
nn

a
PSS) >>>

© UCLES K&J
161


=== Page 167 ===

Sample answer sheet: Paper 3

Pa Universiry of CAMBRIDGE
= Local Examinations Syndicate

1M PL E

— =
Centre No.
Candidate N
—_— 9)0,)9,) 0) oe
oe re - 4,}1] 4]
& ti Titl ft pe es
xamination le pramnation 2l2iz\2
&/3/3)3) om
Centre alaiaia) oo
Supervisor: 2) 5] | 5
SB) 6) B) oe
if the candidate is ABSENT or has. WITHDRAWN shade here = LiL) 22
BB) B) BR) ee
S/R) 3.

Answer Sheet 1

Instructions

Use a soft PENCIL
(B or HB).

Uv
rt)

a
—

‘a

rer

_—i

‘can
HH
=

:
==

Rub out any answer
you wish to change,
with an eraser.

—
‘ee ee | en

|
/
|
I] isi} de
Jo

For Parts 1, 2 and 3:

Write your answer

clearly in CAPITAL

LETTERS.

Write one letter in each
OX.

=

-
;

|
ecan| camel mame
en | eee :
if i

—

—

=

|
=:
=
a
a

oo
—

For example:
Answer Parts 4 and 5

on the second answer
sheet.

oo
HY

=
9
co

Write your answer
neatly in the spaces
provided.

P
—
i |
Roi
rere

|

You do not have to
write in capital letters for
Parts 4 and 5.

a

v
i i

|

I

|
—| |
cement free ere
—

—

162


=== Page 168 ===

Sample answer sheet: Paper 3

aii | [ [| a tities
a a

w|i TT TELE ia

[Continue with Parts 4 and 5 on Answer Sheet 2 >

© UCLES K&) BRIRRUSTe



=== Page 169 ===

Sample answer sheet: Paper 3

UNIVERSITY of CAMBRIDGE
Local Examinations Syndicate

NIM PO

(ul

-
Centre No.
Hnot already printed write name
In CAPITALS and complete the
Candidate No. grid (in pencil),
Candidate's signature Candidate No.
O/H). 0
Examination Title inati AA LL
Centre 3/38/83
AAAS
Supervisor: 5} 5} 5, | 5.
6} |G) | ee
if the candidate is ABSENT or has WITHDRAWN shade here = RAR ARABS
BIBS B) oe
ERE REALS

© UCLES K&J
164


=== Page 170 ===

Sample answer sheet: Paper 3

a ee

Marks

For Examiner use only

Examiner number:
Team and Position

Content [2 A, 4

alae
Aactajet ales!
a leBal 2.12,
BS )35fc35)
mahal,
een EAR AANA
Bf 82)
2/99).
enn

© UCLES K&j

165


=== Page 171 ===

Sample answer sheet: Paper 4

166

UNIVERSITY of CAMBRIDGE
Local Examinations Syndicate

A

S

UU

4
= — =
Candidate Name Centre No.
If not ready printed write neme
in CAPITALS and complete the
Candidate No. grid (in pencil r
Candidate’s signature Candidate No.
as D)).0,).0,) oe
Examination Title Examination ALLL el ee
Details 2/2/22
Centre BBS) 2) me
AAA A) ee
Supervisor: 3A S/S
S| 6G) oe
if the candidate is ABSENT or has WITHDRAWN shade here <a A) 2/252
BiB) BB, ee
313,13, '3.

Candidate Answer Sheet

| Mark test version (in PENCIL) [4 B Cc i Special arrangements co H | Part 1
- 1A 2 Eg
instructions
Use a soft PENCIL (B or HB). 2/4 3 &
Rub out any answer you wish to change with an eraser. 3/ A B =|
For Parts 1 and 3: A 5 7
Mark ONE letter only for each question. 4/5 4 26
For example, if you think B is the right answer, 5|A B ¢
mark your answer sheet like this: == =
e6|A B Cc
For Part 2: 2 SS
Write your answer clearly in 7/A B E&
the space like this: leja 2 S|
Ss = 6

For Part 4:
Write ONE letter only, like this:

Part 2 witehee| | Part 3 Part 4 | wiwhere
9 169°0 18 A B Cc D 23 1 23 2
10 10 0 wi A B & D 2
"1 no| ja) A B Cc D n
12 120 21, A B Cc D 2
143 | wo] ia/A B Cc oD 2
14 “oO o
15 Bo
16 60
7 vo

© UCLES K&J


=== Page 172 ===

Visual materials for Paper 5

C1


=== Page 173 ===

Visual materials for Paper 5

1c



=== Page 174 ===

TEST 2 PAPER 5

C4

TV programme — Controlling nature


=== Page 175 ===

Visual materials for Paper 5

CS



=== Page 176 ===

TEST 3 PAPER 5 Staff recruitment poster - Summer camp

3B



=== Page 177 ===

Visual materials for Paper 5



=== Page 178 ===

TEST 1 PAPER 5 Magazine article — Life this century



=== Page 179 ===

TEST 4 PAPER 5 Exhibition poster — Cities of the future

4A



=== Page 180 ===

Visual materials for Paper 5



=== Page 181 ===

TEST 1

Prompt Card 1b

In what ways are people influenced during
their teenage years?

+ fashions
* career plans
* peer groups

TEST 2

Prompt Card 2b

In what ways have our ideas of right and
wrong changed?

* science and technology
+ media
* sport

TEST 3

Prompt Card 3b

How far is it true that travel broadens the mind?

+ for tourists
+ for workers
+ for the host country

TEST 4

Prompt Card 4b

How should schools help to prepare young
people for the world of work?

* areas of knowledge
+ realistic expectations
* personal qualities



=== Page 182 ===

TEST 1

Prompt Card 1b

In what ways are people influenced during
their teenage years?

+ fashions
* career plans
* peer groups

TEST 2

Prompt Card 2b

In what ways have our ideas of right and
wrong changed?

* science and technology
+ media
* sport

TEST 3

Prompt Card 3b

How far is it true that travel broadens the mind?

* for tourists
+ for workers
* for the host country

TEST 4

Prompt Card 4b

How should schools help to prepare young
people for the world of work?

* areas of knowledge
* realistic expectations
* personal qualities

Cll


=== Page 183 ===

TEST 4

Prompt Card 4c

What’s better — to be self employed or to be an
employee?

+ the purpose of work
+ freedom and responsibility
* technology

C12


=== Page 184 ===

CAMBRIDGE

CERTIFICATE OF PROFICIENCY IN ENGLISH

hh ANSWERS |

Cambridge University Press is the only official publisher of CPE papers
from UCLES - an essential part of any Proficiency preparation course.
Do you want to approach the Cambridge Certificate of Proficiency in English (CPE) with
confidence? Then you need to familiarise yourself thoroughly with the new format and
content of the revised exam — and you need to practise examination techniques using
genuine material such as these CPE papers which have been specially prepared for
publication by the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES).
They provide the most authentic examination practice available.

Cambridge Certificate of Proficiency in English 1 contains:

* four model papers from UCLES which reflect the most recent changes to the
Proficiency exam

* an informative introduction which gives an overview of the different papers and
question types

* photocopiable answer sheets so you can practise transferring your answers.

The Student's Book ‘with answers’ edition also contains a comprehensive section of
answer keys and tapescripts, making it ideal for self-study use.

The accompanying Teacher's Book provides further information about the new format
of the revised CPE and a clear insight into marking and
grading illustrated by authentic sample answers. It also
contains tapescripts and answer keys, making it a valuable,
all-round teacher's resource. The Cassette Set contains the
recorded material for the aural component of the exam.

