Einstein

Stop anyone in the street and ask them to name a scientist, and the chances are they'll think of 
Albert Einstein. His face is used to advertise products with intellectual (1) .... , from computers to 
encyclopaedias.

Most people know little of what Einstein did, except that he developed some mysterious theories 
under the heading 'relativity', which are famous for being incomprehensible, and for coming up with 
bizarre predictions that (2) .... counter to everyday experience.

Einstein was part of a gigantic (3) .... forward in scientific thinking, an intellectual revolution that 
(4) .... the birth of twentieth century science. Physicists and mathematicians were trying to create a 
new, more rational description of the universe by studying relationships between matter and the 
forces of nature.

Einstein (5) ….. his profound and far-reaching contributions simply by looking again at the nature of 
the fundamentals: time, space, matter and energy. Previous descriptions had depended on Isaac 
Newton's view of a universe in which stars and planets moved in an absolute framework of space 
and time. Einstein (6) .... this notion, saying that time and space were not absolute but relative.

1 A suppositions 	B connotations 		C assumptions		D inferences
2 A drive 		B fall 			C flow 			D run
3 A flight 		B leap 			C dive 			D vault
4 A ushered 		B notified 		C heralded 		D declared
5 A gave 		B laid 			C offered 		D made
6 A overthrew 		B overtook 		C overwhelmed 		D overran


Young Readers

Throughout our childhoods, Lydia and I distrusted any prize-winning book because we knew it would 
be worthy; and for 'worthy', (7) .... 'boring', we thought. 
While our mother had been inclined to abhor our philistinism in tones of despising innuendo, our 
father would cheerfully dish us out tenpences, chapter by chapter, as inducements to make us (8) .... 
our eyes over the occasional improving volume. Or he would (9) .... the odd superior book in 
amongst our Christmas and birthday presents, labelled in bold marker pen, 'This Book is NOT 
Literature'. Though we (10) .. .. mast of his offerings as 'boys' books', he did, in this way, (11) . .. us 
to some shorter works of decent fiction and, just once, to a well-known (12) .... of verse.

7  A interpret 		B read 			C consider 		D define
8  A chuck 		B throw 		C hurl 			D cast
9  A link 		B weave 		C slip 			D fold
10 A dismissed 		B disqualified 		C discredited 		D disclaimed
11 A reveal 		B expose 		C unveil 		D disclose
12 A album 		B periodical 		C manual 		D anthology


Language

'The origin of human language is truly secret and marvellous,' wrote Jacob Grimm in 1851. The 
marvellous secret has long proved a launch pad for strange ideas. 'Primitive man was likely to make 
sounds like "meuh" when (13) .... danger,' claimed Charles Caller in 1928. ‘“Meuh" has a plaintive 
sound. The human who wandered over a hostile land inhabited by awesome beasts (14) …. 
desperate noises, and languages have preserved some echo of his lamentation such as malaria 
meaning "fever" or the Latin mars meaning "death".'

Faced with such weird speculations, many avoided the topic; regarding it as a playground for cranks, 
but recently, language origin and evolution have become key research areas. Language probably 
developed in East Africa, around 100,000 years ago. (15) .... , speech was used for friendly 
interaction, and was an important tool in power (16) .... Information-swapping was probably not an 
important original (17) .... - contrary to the views of philosopher John Locke, who spoke of language 
as a 'great conduit' for (18) .. .. knowledge.

13 A feeling 		B sensing 		C suffering 		D fighting
14 A screeched 		B cried 		C called 		D uttered
15 A In conclusion 	B As a consequence 	C In the main 		D Despite this
16 A struggles 		B wars 			C strikes 		D contests
17 A argument 		B service		C role 			D thought
18 A dispatching 	B conveying 		C teaching 		D passing

****

Part 1
1 B 2 D 3 B 4 C 5 D 6 A 7 B 8 D 9 C
10 A 11 B 12 D 13 B 14 D 15 C 16 A 17 C
18 B

----

Paul Simon

Rock and roll in the 1950s was primarily a youth cult, but its lasting importance (1) .... in the seismic
impact it had on the middle class and the middle-aged. It also (2) .... the way for the next generation
of rock idols, who listened to it awestruck and aware that this strange, unsettling sound would
somehow, irrevocably, be (3) .... with their destinies.
For Paul Simon, as for other youngsters in the US, the chief (4) .... for hearing this new and
invigorating type of music that was sweeping the country was courtesy of Alan Freed's radio show,
Moondog Rock 'n' Roll Party. Freed's show was (5) .... listening for a whole generation of fledgling
rock idols. Like the young John Lennon, 3,000 miles away in Liverpool, with his ear (6) .... to Radio
Luxembourg - the only European outlet for the new rock and roll - Paul Simon was fascinated by
the sounds pouring from Freed's show, and prepared himself for the next big step for a rock and roll
obsessed teenager, the switch from listening to others' music to making his own.

1 A stood 	B stayed 	C held 		D lay
2 A paved 	B fashioned 	C generated 	D grounded
3 A fastened 	B joined 	C linked 	D related
4 A opportunity B chance 	C way 		D access
5 A needed 	B obliged 	C demanded 	D required
6 A engrossed 	B glued 	C sealed 	D enthralled


Snow

No path was visible, but I thought that I would be all right if I walked with due caution. The wind
hammered down from the heights, knocking me over as I slid and (7) .. ... on the slippery ice.
Suddenly the innocent-looking snow (8) ..... way beneath me. I dropped, startled, into a hole some
four feet deep. The snow had formed a roof over the gap between two rocks, melting away to leave
nothing but a thin (9) .. .. through which I had plunged. I (10) .... myself out, shaken and unnerved,
wondering what I would have done if the hole had been thirty feet deep. I sat back against the top
of a pine tree that protruded from the snow to take (11) .... of the situation. In an hour I had covered
about half a mile. It was perfectly clear that I would have to (12) .... my plan.

7 A slithered 	B swooped 	C skipped 	D swept
8 A sank 	B gave 		C opened 	D fell
9 A lining 	B fabric 	C crust 	D cloak
10 A hauled 	B handed 	C carted 	D trailed
11 A issue 	B thought 	C stock 	D gist
12 A abandon 	B neglect 	C desist 	D refute


Qualitative Research

There are now numerous books which attempt to give guidance to researchers about qualitative
research. While much has been written about the collection of data, the books are often (13) .. ..
about the processes and procedures associated with data analysis. Indeed, much mystery
surrounds the way researchers analyse their data. (14) .... , we invited a range of social scientists
who have (15) .... in qualiiative projects to discuss the (16) .... that they used. The idea was to share
insight and understanding of the process of qualitative data analysis rather than to produce a
guidebook for the intending researcher. Such a task involves a process of demystification, of (17) ....
implicit procedures more explicit. While this may sound straightforward, we have found it far from
simple. We have therefore given our contributors the opportunity to (18) .. .. their work in a range of
styles, which include autobiographical narratives and more impersonal forms.

13 A silent 	B dark 		C blank 	D dumb
14 A However 	B Accordingly 	C Even so 	D In essence
15 A employed 	B engaged 	C exploited 	D entered
16 A accounts 	B manners 	C approaches 	D modes
17 A turning 	B making 	C putting 	D getting
18 A propose 	B render 	C extend 	D present

****

Part 1
1 D 2 A 3 C 4 A 5 D 6 B 7 A 8 B 9 C
10 A 11 C 12 A 13 A 14 B 15 B 16 C 17 B
18 D

----
Art on TV

Why is it that television so consistently fails when it (1) .. .. to programmes about the visual arts?
Painting and sculpture should be (2) ... . subjects for the camera, which has the ability to show a 
whole work of art, then move in close to examine the details. Yet I can think of few series on television 
that have managed to (3) .... both the pleasure and complexity of looking at them. 

A good example of what goes wrong can be seen in Robert Hughes's eight part survey of American
art, American Visions. Hughes is a critic you can trust, he has a personality that commands attention 
and he has been given nearly eight hours in which to (4) .... British audiences to a school of art that 
British galleries have totally ignored. I had expected the series to (5) .... on great works of art. What 
I got instead was one about the way American history and culture are (6) .... in its art and 
architecture.

1 A applies 	B takes 	C addresses 	D comes
2 A natural 	B due 		C right 	D apparent
3 A convey 	B inflict 	C cast 		D emit
4 A acquaint 	B disclose 	C reveal 	D introduce
5 A target 	B focus 	C aim 		D cover
6 A borne 	B conferred 	C reflected 	D hinted

Dealing in Metals

For 20 years I worked as an international metals dealer and gained something of a reputation as a 
speculator. Metals are (7) .... far less than other markets. With a bit of luck, a (8) .... to take a risk 
and a good understanding of how the market works, it's possible to make a lot of money. Risk-taking 
is part and (9) .... of the industry. The buccaneering culture (10) .... nicely with a free-market global 
economy. But now the free-trade economists who claimed the market itself would maintain the price 
of scarce metals have found the opposite is happening. More minerals are being (11) .... , and the 
cost of raw materials is decreasing. Taking inflation into account, the prices of most metals are about 
half of what they were 20 years ago. Recently, I was asked to look into (12) .... made against one 
of the multinational conglomerates that benefit from these cheap raw materials.

7 A ruled 		B regulated 	C governed 	D legislated
8 A talent 		B gift 		C willingness 	D propensity
9 A portion 		B package 	C present 	D parcel
10 A plays 		B joins 	C fits 		D suits
11 A expelled 		B extracted 	C exhumed 	D expanded
12 A propositions 	B allegations 	C suggestions 	D insinuations

Extract from a Holiday Brochure

Abaco and its off-shore cays are part of the 700 islands of the Bahamas that stretch from Florida,
past the Tropic of Cancer, to Cuba. Each one has its own (13) .... , each one has something to offer.

The key to getting anywhere in the islands and cays of Abaco is a boat. If you don't get one (14) ....
in with the room don't worry. Be happy. There are ferries (15) ..... And water-taxis. Or, there are 
plenty of boats to rent if you prefer to go under your own (16) ....

But sailing is the most popular (17) .... of transport here. Abaco is nicknamed 'The Sailing Capital 
of the World' for good reason.

Those calm, naturally protected waters are also a paradise for fishing, diving, snorkelling and
swimming. The cays and their beaches stretch for 200 miles like a (18) _-, .. of pearls. It's not only at 
sea that gems can be found. At night it's the lights of the restaurants and cafes of Hope Town and 
Green Turtle Cay that sparkle.

13 A trait 	B personality 	C type 		D distinction
14 A pushed 	B given 	C thrown 	D bought
15 A sundry 	B galore 	C legion 	D replete
16 A propulsion B means 	C momentum 	D steam
17 A mode 	B pattern 	C way 		D manner
18 A thread 	B filament 	C line 		D string

****

1 D 2 A 3 A 4 D 5 B 6 C 7 B 8 C 9 D
10 C 11 B 12 B 13 B 14 C 15 B 16 D 17 A
18 D

----

Goat Racing

I was about to witness goat racing. Easter Monday in Buccoo Village. I was fighting my way through 
ice-cream vans, (1) .... of people, food stalls and hot music singeing my eardrums. Even though the 
general movement was towards the racecourse, I (2) .... my way through the crowds in an effort to 
get a good pitch. An area had been (3) .... to make a course for competitors. Not quite on a (4) .... 
with established racecourses, but on the similar assumption that spectators were to line either side 
of a (5) .... of ground along which the participants would travel. An attempt was being made to keep 
a handful of select goats in order. No mean feat when dealing with an animal fabled to eat almost 
anything it can get (6) .... of.

1 A flocks 		B shoals 	C hordes 	D herds
2 A handed 		B thumbed 	C fingered 	D elbowed
3 A cordoned off 	B shut away 	C penned in 	D closed down
4 A standard 		B rule 		C par 		D norm
5 A spread 		B stretch 	C space  	D span
6 A grip 		B hold 		C hang 		D grasp

Canoe Trip

As the day (7) .... to a close, I started to think about the night ahead, and I (8) .... with fear. The 
canoe was too wet to sleep in, there was nowhere to stop, and we hadn't seen any villages or huts 
since early morning. In the dim moonlight, and with the (9) ... . of our torch we could just make out 
the line of the cliffs; the torch batteries were (10) .... , so we put in new  ones, but they didn't work. 
Obviously we weren't going to be able to spot a camping place. A couple of miles later, Lesley called 
out that she had seen a distant flickering light and our hopes (11) .... : the light turned out to be 
moonlight glinting on waves; soon we could hear the roaring noise of fast rushing water, though we
couldn't see what was happening. Time (12) .... still, and we moved on.

7  A led 	B pulled 	C drew 		D headed
8  A thumped 	B beat 		C throbbed 	D shuddered
9  A support 	B means 	C backing 	D aid
10 A dimming 	B failing 	C sinking 	D fainting
11 A soared 	B expanded 	C reared 	D ascended
12 A kept 	B waited 	C stood 	D remained


How to be Presentation Perfect - we answer your questions

I am not a natural at making presentations, yet in my role as managing director I am increasingly 
required to present internally to my colleagues, (13) .. .. externally to the major shareholders. How 
can I improve my presentational techniques and my confidence?

You are not the only one. Making a presentation involves completely different skills from those you 
need to run a company, yet more and more senior executives are (14) .... to be accomplished at it. 

If you are trying to convince your audience of something, you have to be convinced yourself. 
Demonstrate your conviction in the passion and enthusiasm you (15) .. .. to the presentation. That 
means you must do your homework. Test your proposition carefully in advance. Ask colleagues to 
identify the 'hard questions' your audience might (16) .... to you. You also need to build a positive 
climate from the (17) ..... Begin with an area of (18) .... ground that people can identify with and 
build gradually towards the conclusion you want to reach.

13 A let alone 	B not to mention 	C besides 	D alongside
14 A demanded 	B called 		C expected 	D desired
15 A bring 	B bear 			C convey 	D deliver
16 A make 	B request 		C propose 	D put
17 A outset 	B outcome 		C outlook 	D output
18 A mutual 	B common 		C shared 	D similar

****

1 C 2 D 3 A 4 C 5 B 6 B 7 C 8 D 9 D
10 B 11 A 12 C 13 B 14 C 15 A 16 D 17 A
18 B

----





