Fashion
Fashion is often seen as a modern phenomenon, entirely (1) .... upon nineteenth- and twentieth-
century capitalism for its development. Most historians of fashion are at (2) .... to point out, though,
that fashion, at least in the (3) .... of style and design, has a very long history. They often (4) .... the
rise of the market and mercantile trade in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries as their starting 
point.
As societies have developed in complexity, populations have expanded, and multiple technologies 
for producing an increasing variety of clothing and physical adornment have been discovered, so
 the meanings attached to dress have also increased in their complexity and significance. 
Consequently, it is difficult to say with any (5) .... of certainty today what any item of clothing or
 adornment actually means. For example, a man's suit, (6) .... an indicator of the most extreme 
uniformity, actually conveys very differing meanings in different contexts and to different people.

1 A responsible B subject C conditional D dependent
2 A effort B pains C agony D trouble
3 A scale B frame C sense D aspect
4 A take B get C put D make
5 A ratio B element C degree D shadow
6 A definitely B supposedly C evidently D obviously

Writer
Newspaper reports of publishers in (7) .... wars over whizz-kid manuscripts have resulted in a skewed
idea of what life is like for your average novelist. Down at my end of the business - i.e. not exactly
topping the best-seller lists - there are two ways of making ends (8) ..... The wisest among us write
in the evenings and have other full-time jobs that will still be there even if the book doesn't immediately
get (9) .... up and turned into a film. Those such as myself, however, are literary odd-jobbers, (10) ....
on a bit of teaching, the occasional workshop and articles like this. l have (11) .... tell of an in-house
writing opportunity offered by a chocolate factory, but I've never managed to get anything like that.
Somehow, though, by (12) .... of juggling part-time jobs and credit cards and also, more often than
not, thanks to the generosity of those names you find in Acknowledgements, the novel gets written.

7 A petitioning B bidding C tendering D proffering
8 A join B meet C connect D tie
9 A swallowed B gobbled C sucked D snapped
1 O A subsisting B enduring C abiding D prevailing
11 A noted B heard C received D experienced
12 A way B attempt C dint D reason

Sudden Fame
The small (13) .... we were performing at around the country were all beginning to sell (14) .... and
extra bouncers were having to be called in to hold back the growing legion of screaming girls. We
found ourselves having to use secret entrances to the village halls and ballrooms we were playing
to prevent ourselves being mobbed by fans. On the few nights a week when we were not working,
we found it difficult to leave the house without being pursued through the streets by adoring
followers. In a (15) .... of days, we had been transformed into celebrities. Our moves were monitored
by our admirers and all of our needs (16) .... for by our management and other interested parties.
Even though the shyness that had always accompanied me never quite went away, it was replaced
by a strange naive over-confidence that only naturally shy people who have been thrust into similar
situations can (17) .... to. In short, I was emotionally totally out of my (18) .....

13 A sites B venues C scenes D abodes
14 A out B up C off Don
15 A course B question C spell D matter
16 A answered B catered C afforded D granted
17 A identify B relate C ally D connect
18 A depth B extent C level D reach
****
1 D 2 B 3 C 4 A 5 C 6 B 7 B 8 B 9 D
10 A 11 B 12 C 13 B 14 A 15 D 16 B 17 B
18 A
----

Citizen Kane
When the film Citizen Kane finally appeared in 1941, despite the brouhaha that attended its (1) ....
- delayed because of distributors' fears of the harm William Randolph Hearst, its (2) .... subject,
might do to them - and largely ecstatic reviews, it was not a commercial success. It was television
that brought it back to the public consciousness. It is perhaps the one film, above all others, that has
inspired people to become film-makers. This is all the more astonishing since it was Orson Welles's
first film. Welles always (3) .... that its success arose from his having no idea of what he was or
wasn't allowed to do: he just went ahead and did it. But he had an extraordinary team at his (4) .... ,
cameraman Gregg Toland, screenwriter Herman J. Mankiewicz, and the special-effects wizard
Linwood Dunn. When Welles and Mankiewicz (5) .. .. on the idea of portraying a newspaper magnate
who both was and wasn't Hearst, Welles realised that he had found a perfect vehicle for himself both
as director and actor, and (6) .... his chance with the energy of a whirlwind.

1 A issue B release C publication D broadcast
2 A attested B admitted C alleged D affirmed
3 A maintained B upheld C detailed D specified
4 A disposal B invitation Chand D option
5 A latched B jumped C caught D hit
6 A gripped B plucked C seized D wrenched

Dermot and Carmel
Dermot thought that Carmel was rather odd that morning. Twice he had said that he might be fate
and not to worry if he (7) .... into the golf club on the way home. He had to have a natter with someone
and that was the best place to have it. Twice she had (8) .... her head amiably and distantly as if she
hadn't really heard or understood.
'Will you be all right? What are you going to do today?' he had asked.
She had smiled. 'Funny you should ask that. I was just thinking that I hadn't anything to do all day
so I was going to (9) .... downtown and look at the shops. I was thinking that it was almost a sinful
thing, just (10) .... away the day.'
Dermot had smiled back. 'You're (11) ... . to enjoy yourself. And as I said, if I'm late I won't want
anything to eat. So don't (12) .... to any trouble.'
'No, that's fine,' she said.

7 A fell B bumped C dropped D cut
8 A nodded B gestured C shrugged D stirred
9 A pace B tread C step D stroll
10 A drifting B killing C easing D idling
11 A sanctioned B entitled C justified D rightful
12 A take B get C go D put

Title Race
Tea boy? Do you mind, I'm a mobile lukewarm beverage resource facilitator.
Human nature provides the most divine of comedies. (13) .. .. a recent study which has informed the
nation that job titles are a prime cause of envy and unrest at work. A survey by a leading firm of
recruitment consultants found that 90% of employers and 70% of employees admit that titles create
(14) .... among colleagues.
Most shockingly, the survey found that 70% of office workers would be willing to (15) .... a pay rise
in favour of a more 'motivational' or 'professional' job title. If our vanity is (16) .... such proportions
that even basic greed is being overwhelmed, we are indeed in dire straits.
The truth is that in these brave new days of the early twenty-first century, nobody is content to be
(17) .... subordinate. The titles under discussion (18) .... the emphasis on ability (specialist,
coordinator) but are, in fact, little more than euphemisms.

13 A Corroborate B Testify C Confirm D Witness
14 A compartments B demarcations C divisions D partitions
15 A forgo B revoke C forbear D resign
16 A attaining B reaching C touching D finding
17 A defined B marked C labelled D identified
18 A place B set C fix D allocate
****
1 B 2 C 3 A 4 A 5 D 6 C 7 C 8 A 9 D
10 D 11 B 12 C 13 D 14 C 15 A 16 B 17 C
18 A
----
Amateur Astronomy

Many things have changed in astronomy over the past half-century. Until about 30 years ago, there was a 
great (1) .... of charts and catalogues. Telescopic equipment was limited and there were few books on 
practical astronomy. Today, the range of off-the-shelf telescopes and equipment covers almost everything
 one could need. Electronic calculators and computers have revolutionised almanacs and chart production,
 and (2) .... the analysis of observations and the publication of
results.

All this must surely make this the golden (3) .... of amateur astronomy. Well, perhaps, but a great deal has
 been lost as well. Now one may have to travel 80 km to find a sky comparable to that found in urban areas 
50 years ago. The daytime skies are now (4) .... by aircraft condensation trails which can (5) .... for hours 
and often spread out to form amorphous clouds, making solar observations impossible and (6) .... night-time
 observation too.
1 A deficiency                B shortfall              C inadequacy                D shortage
2 A facilitated               B maximised              C cultivated                D upheld
3 A period                    B age                    C time                      D term
4 A bothered                  B plagued                C troubled                  D badgered
5 A proceed                   B pursue                 C prolong                   D persist
6 A hampering                 B smothering             C overcoming                D combating

Too Much Choice

Society is becoming 'overchoiced'. There are too many things to do, too many
 options, too many opportunities. In the new economy, the desire for the new product, service or next big thing is an
 addiction, and technology simply accelerates the (7) .... of change: the noise, the (8) .... of new
 goods and services, offering more and more choice. No sooner has the new product emerged off 
this virtual production line than the next one is about to be (9) ..... The head spins, the brain races,
 the fatigue (10) .... ; the disconnection from life begins.
Choice is the mantra of the new economy, but more choice means more stress, less time and more
 complexity. Hence a new trend is (11) ..... The search is on for 'simplexity' - the simple things that 
give meaning in an increasingly complex world. But simpl'i fying your life is not easy in an age of 
economic excess. There are more basic brands of detergent and breakfast cereals than we can ever
 need or want, more software upgrades, features and calling plans than we can keep (12) .... of.

7 A motion               B step               C pace               D movement
8 A proliferation       B escalation      C extension       D augmentation
9 A initiated             B embarked       C instituted        D launched
10 A sets in             B gives in           C sets up           D gives up
11 A aground           B afoot               C abreast           D afire
12 A track               B sight                 C trace               D hold

McAndrews Hotel

Every summer we spend a fortnight in McAndrews Hotel in North Mayo, Ireland. It is a family
tradition, (13) .... by my grandmother, and by now it has achieved a certain sacredness.Nothing is
 allowed to interfere with the ritual. We are of a kind, McAndrews clientele: old-fashioned, odd 
perhaps, some would say snobbish. I do not like the bad manners, the insolence of shop assistants
 which (14) .... for egalitarianism in this present age; I resent chummy overtures from waiters who
 sometimes appear to (15) .... themselves with difficulty from slapping one on the back. I know most
 of my fellow-guests' names - like me they have been coming here since they were children - yet
 can (16) .... assured that when I meet any of them in any part of the hotel, I shall be spared all social 
intercourse (17).... a civil word of greeting. Such respect for dignity and personal privacy is (18) ....
to come by in commercial establishments these days.

13 A constructed B prompted C heralded D instigated
14 A passes B poses C claims D serves
15 A restrict B repress C restrain 0 retract
16 A stand B rest C stay D keep
17 A on top of B rather than C as much as D apart from
18 A slow B rare C hard D seldom

****

1 D 2 A 3 B 4 B 5 D 6 A 7 C 8 A 9 D
10 A 11 B 12 A 13 D 14 A 15 C 16 B 17 D
18 C

----


Photography
When a photographer takes a photograph, he or she makes a selection of visual information that is
(1) .... by his or her technical and aesthetic skills, personal views and experience, together with a
(2) .... of social and cultural norms. And in the (3) .... of this book we shall see how these factors not
only affect the style, content and expression of a photograph, but also how those images are
perceived and responded to by the viewer. For example, we might consider that the (4) .... reader
of a newspaper will have an implicit understanding of the photographic images reproduced on the
page. But rather than accepting the photograph at face (5) .... , we might question whether it
accurately recorded the scene as it would have looked at the time. Or, in contrast, does it
communicate the photographer's point of view? Is it the (6) .... instant recorded that is of particular
importance, or should the photograph on the page be understood as a symbol to represent a state
of affairs in the world?
1 A concluded B imposed C determined D directed
2 A group B set C band D batch
3 A course B progress C means D process
4 A shallow B casual C slight D random
5 A regard B esteem C respect D value
6 A accurate B definite C precise D absolute

More than a game
Sport for me has always been more than just a game. The most successful people in sport have
total self-belief. You need tunnel (7) .... if you want to succeed in sport. There's only one route to
being the best and you have to put everything else to one (8) ..... Sport is ruthless and no one else
is going to do it for you. It's sink or (9) .....
Sport has taught me personal discipline and determination, but it can also teach you the benefits of
working as one of a team. My sport allows and encourages you to (10) .... individually, yet it is a
team game and you have to balance these two aspects. It's very much like life - you can succeed
as an individual, but you must never forget there are others around you.
Sport has given me a great deal - and not just financially. It has opened (11) .... for me and opened
my eyes, and I've seen things around the world that others will never see. But you also have to give
up a lot for those (12) .....
7 A sight B view C vision D outlook
8 A margin B side C part D edge
9 A swim B float C sail D drift
10 A outdo B surpass C outshine D excel
11 A gates B doors C windows D barriers
12 A supplements B tips C perks D complements

Tuning in
Some experiences (13) .... themselves so sharply on our memory that they form islands of clarity
in our recollection. For me, such a momentous (14) .... took place one night in California many years
ago, when I lay awake listening to the rapturous strains of a mockingbird singing from an invisible
(15) .... in one of the tall trees that were (16) .... around the suburban neighbourhood. I don't suffer
from insomnia - it was the exquisite artistry of the singer that kept me awake. As I followed his
intricately woven melodies, I found myself (17) .... into an unexpected aesthetic environment. In
order to follow the patterns that issued from the bird, I had to call on my experience of jazz and Indian
classical music. The bird had me (18) .... that I was being treated to an ad lib performance of the
most breathtaking improvisational acrobatics. I groaned and I cheered as one improbable musical
variation followed another through the open window where I lay listening, until finally I fell asleep.
13 A etch B scratch C trace D cut
14 A proceeding B circumstance C development D occasion
15 A venue B location C situation D area
16 A spotted B dabbed C dotted D flecked
17 A engaged B captivated C pushed D drawn
18 A prevailed B proved C convinced D confirmed
****
1 C 2 B 3 A 4 B 5 D 6 C 7 C 8 B 9 A
10 D 11 B 12 C 13 A 14 D 15 B 16 C 17 D
18 C
----

The Tintin books
What is so special about Georges 'Herge' Remi's tales of the adventures of a boy called Tintin,
created for a newspaper in Belgium in the 1920s, that they should have (1) .... being translated
into more than 50 languages and selling more than 120 million copies? How is it that they have
managed to endure for so long? One reason may be Herge's extraordinary attention to detail. He
constantly revised and improved Tintin's original black-and-white adventures to make them more
(2) .... to new audiences. And he based all his illustrations on an extensive personal library of
photographs which he (3) .... over the years.
In a career of more than 50 years, Herge produced only 24 Tintin books. Had he been less
meticulous, he might well have been a lot more (4) .... , but I doubt he would have been so widely
loved and admired. Picking up a Tintin book the other day for the first time in many years, I found
myself (5) .... between the urge to race through the story and an (6) .... to linger on the visual
detail.
1 A turned out B finished off C come to D ended up
2 A relevant B apt C applicable D fitting
3 A amassed B mustered C convened D swelled
4 A abundant B prolific C fruitful D profuse
5 A pulled B drawn C lured D torn
6 A impetus B incentive C impulse D intuition
Cave fauna
For the past 35 years a professor of zoology named Valerio Sbordoni has explored the caves and
underground chambers of Mexico in search of new forms of life. He has found these in abundance,
to say the least. To (7) .... Sbordoni has discovered more than 150 species of (8) .... unknown
cave-dwelling creatures. In one chamber (9) .... , he found over forty (10) .... species of butterfly,
an incredible variety for such an inhospitable environment.
Many of these species, Sbordoni believes, (11) .... underground millions of years ago to avoid
extinction and adapted to life beneath the earth's surface. Obviously, conditions for life
underground are far from ideal, and Sbordoni believes that only severe climatic changes, probably
caused by shifting glaciers, could (12) .... such a migration.
7 A now B present C today D date
8 A hitherto B hereby C henceforth D herewith
9 A exclusively B only C alone D solely
10 A dissimilar B distinct C disparate D disconnected
11 A retired B shrank C retreated D departed
12 A conjure up B account for C bear out D carry off
Sadie and her son
A combination of boredom and, increasingly, absenteeism, ensured that the standard of Eric's work
declined alarmingly. Sadie, who had hoped that her son would do well at school, was too (13) .... a 
mother to have remained unaware of the problem for very long, but when the school reports started 
to (14) ... . just how poorly he was faring, she felt shocked and angry.
One report (15) .... curtly that Eric was 45th out of 49 pupils. Sadie, typically, was determined that 
her son should arrest his dizzying decline as speedily as possible and then - she hoped - start 
to improve. She visited the school and offered to pay for further tuition but was told, 'It would be 
money down the (16) .... .' This rejection only seemed to (17) .... Sadie on in her search for a 
suitable career for Eric. It surprised no one who knew her that she reacted to the undeniably 
(18) .... disappointment of this setback in such a remarkably spirited and positive manner.
13 A engrossed B mindful C riveted D attentive
14 A proclaim B advocate C denote D underline
15 A professed B announced C aired D uttered
16 A pipe B drain C sink D gutter
17 A spur B press C incite D boost
18 A vivid B stark C bitter D hard

****

1 D 2 A 3 A 4 B 5 D 6 C 7 D 8 A 9 C
10 B 11 C 12 B 13 D 14 D 15 B A6 B 17 A
18 C

----

Professional sport
When I talk about practice, I mean something individual. If you look at professional golfers or tennis 
players, you will observe that practice (1) .... the basis of their preparation for tournaments. Of
course it does, (2) .... these are individual sports. Training is simply doing the physical work
necessary to be sufficiently fit, but practice entails making an analysis of one's game, locating its
weak points, and working to (3) .... them. If your opponent keeps winning points by serving high
to your backhand, there's no place to hide; you either have to (4) .... the weakness, or you'll keep
losing to him. He'll exploit your weaknesses mercilessly.
Part of what is fascinating, and slightly repellent, about sport lies in that curious inversion of values
(5) . . . . much that we admire in ordinary life - humility, compassion, unwillingness to take
advantage of the weakness of others - is reversed on the field of play. Professional sport is all
about winning. And, within (6) .... the more you practise (and the more you train), the better your
chances of doing so.
1 A lays B composes C enacts D forms
2 A albeit B for C as with D let alone
3 A eradicate B rid C wipe D extinguish
4 A alter B square C reform D rectify
5 A insofar B whereby C thereof D hence
6 A due B sense C reason D merit
Introduction to a magazine feature
Are your cupboards bursting at the seams, your bag full of unwanted receipts, sweet wrappers and
chewed up pens? Do you often spend ages searching for keys, or telephone numbers (7) .... down
on the backs of envelopes? If the answer is 'yes', then worry no more. The order and calm you
long for is nearer than you think. Just follow our guide to decluttering your life.
It's difficult to think clearly or creatively, to relax or (8) .... , if you live amongst piles of junk. Clutter
has a way of controlling us. When our environment is in a (9) .... , our minds can also feel
disordered. When rubbish is allowed to (10) .... up, and stagnate, a combination of frustration,
confusion and lethargy (11) .... ; we can feel stuck and unsure of our direction. Clearing out unused
and unwanted (12) .... allows us to focus more clearly. Try for yourself and see.
7 A jotted B penned C doodled D etched
8 A unfold B unleash C unload D unwind
9 A dump B chaos C mess D tip
10 A clog B build C stock D grow
11 A holds on B stands out C joins up D sets in
12 A features B items C matters D entities
Problem staff
The issue of problem staff in restaurants covers a multitude of sins. Usually poor service comes
(13) .. .. to the behaviour of an individual employee, but it's also the restaurant's responsibility.
Why should restaurant managers tolerate bad attitudes? When you do get a less than helpful
waiter, it's tempting to suggest to the manager or owner that the individual concerned might be
better employed elsewhere - not in the service industry, perhaps. (14) .... are they're already
aware of such 'attitude issues' and tolerate bad behaviour for reasons best (15) .... to themselves.
This is when it's worth remembering that a service charge isn't mandatory. (16) .... them where it
hurts - in the (17) .... packet, and eventually they might (18) .... the message.
13 A over B along Cup D down
14 A Possibilities B Chances C Eventualities D Prospects
15 A renowned B familiar C known D acknowledged
15 A Tap B Knock C Hit D Strike
17 A pay B salary C wages D earnings
18 A catch B get C take D grasp

****
1 D 2 B 3 A 4 D 5 B 6 C 7 A 8 D 9 C 10 B 11 D 12 B 13 D 14 B 15 C 16 C 17 A 18 B 

----

Listing
In Britain the badge of distinction awarded to historic buildings is unheroically called 'listing'. When
a building is listed it is (1) .... for preservation and it is expected to stand more or less indefinitely
- nobody expects it to be demolished, ever. But what is the (2) .... expectancy of, (3) .... , a
nineteenth-century terraced house? A few years ago most people assumed that such houses
would eventually wear out and be replaced - and millions were demolished in slum (4) ..... But
about 2.5 million of these terraces survive, and in some towns they are being given 'conservation
area' (5) .... , so don't expect the bulldozers there. The very low rates of demolition and
construction in the UK (6) .... that the building stock as a whole is ageing, and this has enormous
implications for the long-term sustainability of housing.
1 A branded B earmarked C minted D tagged 
2 A time B age C strength D life
3 A say B imagine C think D look
4 A removal B riddance C clearance D dispatch
5 A quality B class C rank D status
6 A mean B convey C explain D determine
Shopping in Europe
The first self-service stores opened in America in the 1920s but they didn't catch on in Europe until
later, when the French forged ahead with their massive hypermarkets. Britain (7) . . . . behind.
Although the first self-service shop and the first supermarket were opened in the early 1940s, it
was thought that British housewives did not particularly want efficiency and speed. Surveys
showed that while American shoppers complained most about delays in check-out queues, British
ones objected to being pushed and (8) .... by other customers.
The (9) . . . . of supermarket shopping is impersonality, with no mediating salesman between
shopper and goods, only the 'silent persuaders' of packaging and display. However, there is a
current (10) .... towards 'boutiques', with personal service, within supermarkets - the butcher, the
baker, the fishmonger - and small specialist shops and farmers' markets are making a (11) .... in
Britain. In France, where every (12) .... provincial town, ringed by supermarkets, retains its
specialist food shops and weekly street market, the traditional co-exists with the new.
7 A dwelled B clung C deferred D lagged
8 A thrust B shoved C heaved D jerked
9 A crux B key C gist D essence
10 A momentum B trend C craze D vogue
11 A comeback B rebound C rally D pick-up
12 A self-regarding B self-appointed C self-respecting D self-conscious
Teeth
Smile at yourself in the mirror. Do you like what you see? If not, cosmetic dentistry could be the
answer. 'Dentistry has (13) .... a long way since the days of simple fillings and extractions,' says
London dental surgeon Dr Phil Stemmer, whose client list at his Teeth For Life clinic (14) .... pop
s4cars, actresses and even royalty, although his lips are tightly (15) .... on names. 'More and more
People are turning to dentistry as a way of improving appearance,' he says. 'Shape, form, colour
and alignment all make noticeable differences to a smile, and by creating an improved smile I can
dramatically alter a person's whole (16) .... of themselves.' Top actress Julia Roberts seems to be
universally (17) .... as the 'gold standard' in smiles, and, following her lead, one of the first
things top models invest in is a perfect set of teeth to improve their chances of becoming cover-
girls (18) .....
13 A gone B been C come D done
14 A proclaims B brags C trumpets D boasts
15 A closed B glued C sealed D shut
16 A perception B observation C discernment D consciousness
17 A cheered B hailed C saluted D exalted
18 A stuf B substance C material D matter

****

1 B 2 D 3 A 4 C 5 D 6 A 7 D 8 B 9 D
10 B 11 A 12 C 13 C 14 D 15 C 16 A 17 B
18 C

----

Flight to Phoenix
I was booked on an early flight so I (1) .... no time in getting showered and dressed, and
(2) .... for the airport. It was only when I felt the aircraft leave the runway, and saw Manhattan
(3) .... into the distance beneath and behind me, that I finally began to relax.
Even at nine o'clock in the morning Phoenix was hot. It was a physical shock to walk out of
the cool, dark terminal into the bright reflection of the sunlight. Locals ambled slowly past in
short-sleeved shirts and sunglasses. In less than a minute I was sweating in my suit as I carried
my bags over to the large sign which read 'Bloomfield Weiss High Yield Bond Conference'.
They had (4) .... on white stretch limousines to take the conference participants to the hotel. Within
seconds, I was back in air-conditioned quiet again. I supposed that it was (5) .... possible to spend
all of your life in Phoenix at 18° centigrade, with only brief (6) .... of extra heat as you transferred
from air-conditioned house to air-conditioned car to air-conditioned office.
1 A used B lost C left D made
2 A headed B pressed C proceeded D set
3 A abating B withdrawing C receding D reversing
4 A laid B catered C sorted D furnished
5 A purely B perfectly C starkly D solidly
6 A gales B torrents C fits D bursts
Keas - not just pretty parrots
Few birds are as (7) .... curious as keas. New research shows how these New Zealand parrots
channel that curiosity for maximum benefit: they (8) .... up tips by watching each other. Keas are
notorious for investigating and, in the (9) .... , often destroying everything from rubbish bins to
windscreen wipers. Ludwig Huber and colleagues from the University of Vienna have found that in
keas, which live in family flocks, social learning affects patterns of curiosity. In their experiments,
the keas' task was to open a steel box with a complex locking mechanism. Two birds were
gradually trained as 'models' and then they (10) .... the task again under the watchful gaze of keas
who were new to the job. (11) .... enough, birds who had watched a demonstration had a much
higher success (12) .... than keas who had never watched one.
7 A insatiably B hungrily C thirstily D unmanageably
8 A take B lift C pick D pull
9 A procedure B process C measure D technique
10 A enacted B staged C performed D presented
11 A Certain B Sure C True D Fair
12 A proportion B percentage C occurrence D rate
Bureaucracy
Given that bureaucracy is held in such ill (13) .... today, it is hard to remember that it was once
considered a great organisational innovation. By organising the (14) .... of labour, by making
management and decision-making a profession, and by providing an order and a set of rules that
allowed  many different kinds of specialists to work in coordination toward a common (15) .... ,
bureaucracy greatly extended the breadth and depth of intelligence that organisations could
2chieve. Begun as a system of organising government activities, it has (16) .... to big business and
large organisations of all kinds.
Max Weber, who (17) .... the systematic study of bureaucracy as its role in western society began
to explode in the late nineteenth century, saw bureaucracy as both the most efficient possible
system,. and a threat to the basic liberties he (18) .... dear, thus foreshadowing the sentiments
which bureaucracy frequently evokes today.
13 A notoriety B knowledge C repute D name 
14 A division B distinction C detachment D divergence
15 A end B finish C culmination D termination
16 A carried B spread C transmitted D caught
17 A opened B sprang C launched D fired
18 A loved B felt C knew D held

****
1 B 2 A 3 C 4 A 5 B 6 D 7 A 8 C 9 B
10 C 11 B 12 D 13 C 14 A 15 A 16 B 17 C
18 D

----
