Vancouver
In the last ten years or so, hundreds of thousands of people from all over the world have
(1) .... up residence in Vancouver, in western Canada. To relax in the evening, residents
(2) .... down the city streets and, if you join them, you are likely to overhear a different language at
almost every other step. People come to Vancouver for its mild climate, its wonderful setting
between the ocean and the mountains, its clean and safe environment and its educational and job
opportunities. And (3) .... some may grumble about the speed at which new buildings have (4) .... ,
there's no doubt that the new arrivals and (5) .... tourism industry have helped fuel an urban
renaissance. Locals once referred to Vancouver as 'Terminal City' because of the city's role as
a terminus or gateway to all other places. Though the name has fallen slightly out of (6) .... ,
Vancouver is more a gateway than ever.

1 A taken B put C made D built
2 A prowl B stumble C trudge D stroll
3 A conversely B nevertheless C much as D even so
4 A sprung up B gathered up C piled up D moved up
5 A progressing B blooming C flourishing D swelling
6 A approval B favour C opinion D support

Putting Pen to Paper
Journalists like myself are usually poor letter-writers. I have heard it (7) .... that this is because of 
the instinctive distaste we feel at writing something we are not going to be paid for, but I cannot 
believe we have quite such mercenary characters. It is more probably that (8) .... in our work, we
are always (9) .... to get the greatest possible effect, the essential spontaneity of a letter (10) .... 
us. The real creative artist, who does not consciously work on the effect at all (though he may re-
write a passage dozens of times), does not have this problem. I believe that it is in this inherent 
grasp of the effect of his words that there (11) .... the only sure test of the real artist. When 
Shakespeare wrote some of his famous lines he (12) .... never thought consciously that it was the 
contrast between polysyllables that made them so effective, as well as showing him to be a great 
writer.

7 A said B told C remarked D presumed
8 A since B for C like D once
9 A striving B exerting C contending D tackling
10 A misses B escapes C avoids D passes
11 A goes B remains C lies D exists
12 A inevitably B confidently C particularly D surely

Supermarket Opening
The opening of a new supermarket used to be a bit of an event in Britain. You could always rely 
on a soap star, a disc jockey or a minor member of the royal family to come down and cut the 
ribbon. Now it seems that new branches are (13) .... up every day in many areas and so the poor
old celebrity has become (14) ..... Why pay a famous person when any Tom, Dick or Harry will 
open it for nothing? Last week, waiting pensioners didn't care who opened the new branch of 
Superbuy, (15) .... they were at the front. According to one prospective customer who knew 
someone who worked there, the first five men over the (16) .... would be getting a bottle of 
aftershave, and the first five women, a bunch of flowers. This (17) .... of information quickly swept 
(18) .... the crowd, instilling feelings of smug superiority among those at the front, and envy from 
the latecomers.

13 A popping B leaping C jumping D nipping
14 A superfluous B excessive C surplus D residual
15 A despite B so long as C in case D regardless
16 A entrance B doorway C threshold D barrier
17 A clipping B strand C string D snippet
18 A among B through C across D around

****

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)
1 A 2 D 3 C 4 A 5 C 6 B 7 A 8 A 9 A
10 B 11 C 12 D 13 A 14 A 15 B 16 C
17 D 18 B

----

Language
You and I belong to a species with a remarkable ability; we can shape events in each other's brains
with exquisite precision. Language is so (1) .... woven into human experience that it is scarcely
possible to imagine life without it. (2) .... are that if you find two or more people together anywhere
on earth, they will soon be (3) .... words. When there is no one to talk with, people talk to
themselves, to their dogs, even to their plants. I like to describe the skill of language as an 'instinct'.
This (4) .... the idea that people know how to talk in more or less the sense that spiders know how
to spin webs. Web-spinning was not invented by some unsung spider genius, and does not (5) ....
having had the right education or on having an (6) .... for architecture or the construction trades.

1 A rigidly B tightly C stiffly D tautly
2 A Chances B Probabilities C Reasons D Explanations
3 A sharing B reciprocating C exchanging D trading
4 A transmits B disseminates C transfers D conveys
5 A build on B depend on C count on D bank on
6 A aptitude B applicability C intuition D intelligence

Climate and Weather
Climate and weather, which are mainly created by the air around us, profoundly affect the lives
and distribution of animals and plants. Climate can be a dominating force on the character of
landscapes. For example, warmth and wetness all the year round allow the growth of tropical
jungles, which are natural (7) .... troves, with an incredible diversity of species. (8) .... cold,
windswept areas can muster only a scattered selection of living things. The daily weather patterns
that (9) .... up in the long term to the climate are caused by great masses of air rising and mixing,
for the atmosphere is never still. Some of the motion is (10) .... the fact that the envelope of gases
rests on a spinning globe; because air is thin it is not dragged along at the same speed as the
earth, but tends to (11) .... behind. A more important (12) .... of turbulence, or air movement,
however, is the sun.

7 A prize B treasure C fortune D trophy
8 A Subsequently B Conversely C Simultaneously D Eventually
9 A make B join C add D load
10 A along with B apart from C due to D given that
11 A lag B stray C delay D linger
12 A root B spring C font D source

Coffee
My duties as bar-person included serving drinks but, more worryingly, I was to be responsible for
making coffee. In Lygon Street, Melbourne, a restaurant can stand or fall on its coffee reputation.
There followed several days of intensive coffee-making training, in which I (13) .... more than I could
ever wish to know about the cleaning and (14) .... of the restaurant's gleaming espresso machine.
I learnt, too, about the essential principles (15) .... in making the perfect cup of rich, frothy cappuccino.
By the end of the first week I had to admit that making a decent cup of coffee was not as easy as
it looked and I (16) .... expected to be (17) .... to lowly ash-tray wiping duties again. Luckily, my
boss was a patient man. 'Making coffee is both an art and a science,' he said, 'and you need time
to (18) ... the knack.'

13 A took in B carried off C pulled through D looked up
14 A catering B service C preservation D maintenance
15 A concerned B involved C needed D established
16 A fully B wholly C mainly D nearly
17 A banished B deported C punished D ordered
18 A achieve B attain C activate D acquire

****

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)
1 B 2 A 3 C 4 D 5 B 6 A 7 B 8 B 9 C 
10 C 11 A 12 D 13 A 14 D 15 B 16 A
17 A 18 D

----

Othello
The transfer to London from Stratford of an exceptional production of Shakespeare's play Othello 
allows me to make (1) .... for an unfair review that I wrote when the show opened last spring. Back 
then I complained that Ray Fearon was too young to play the title role and I was guilty of running 
down his acting. I still think it's a distortion of the tragedy to remove the age difference between 
Othello and Desdemona but I eat my (2) .... about the rest of Mr Fearon's magnificent performance.
Indeed the whole cast is magnificent. Memorable scenes include the one where Cassio's 
competitive games with the other young officers get dangerously out of (3) .... , and the moment 
when Iago begins to lose control and has to struggle to get a (4) .... on himself. And I challenge 
anyone not to be (5) .... to tears during the scene where Emilia prepares Desdemona for bed. The 
(6) .... and tension throughout are terrific. Do not miss this production.

1 A confessions B amends C compensation D recourse
2 A thoughts B words C ideas D comments
3 A turn B place C reach D hand
4 A brake B grasp C rein D grip
5 A drawn B sent C moved D carried
6 A pace B dash C rate D haste

Lake Vostok
In the heart of Antarctica, nothing (7) ..... On the fringes of the continent there are penguins, seals 
and birds aplenty. But up on the great white plateau in the interior, life has no foothold. Except,
(8) .... , in a vast hidden expanse of freshwater named Lake Vostok which lies beneath nearly 
4 kilometres of ice, directly below the coldest (9) .... on earth. The water has been isolated from air a
nd sunlight for up to 25 million years. Biologists can hardly wait to (10) .... its mysterious depths 
and discover what strange organisms lurk within. Geologists and glaciologists are hot on their 
(11) ..... For two years now, researchers round the world have been plotting ways to uncover the 
lake's secrets, and, if they get their wish, in the next few years we will (12) .... the decade of Lake 
Vostok.

7 A stalks B stirs C suits D sounds
8 A that is B for example C in effect D as such
9 A tip B speck C spot D dot
10 A burrow B plunge C tunnel D probe
11 A heels B knees C paces D steps
12 A present B witness C expose D reveal

Scientists
There was an interesting thing on the radio last week. It seems that a bunch of scientists are getting 
themselves hot under the (13) .... over what drives them to be scientists; the expression 'because 
it's there' (14) .... to mind. Sure we all know it's the age-old (15) .... for knowledge, the desire to 
understand everything from the atom to the black hole. But what these guys want to know is why 
we want to know all of this in the first (16) .... and why can't science explain why we want to know? 
Surely, it's more important to know whether what we scientists are doing is right, rather than get 
(17) .... in debates over the point of it all. I would have thought that the crucial issue here is not 
why we pursue it, but to (18) .... that science is a tool, and we are the ones who should decide 
how, where, when and why to use it.

13 A shirt B collar C cuff D hat
14 A trips B bounds C springs D slips
15 A mission B quest C journey D expedition
16 A place B stage C step D part
17 A pulled up B dragged up C slowed down D bogged down
18 A identify B accommodate C distinguish D recognise

****

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)
1 B 2 B 3 D 4 D 5 C 6 A 7 B 8 A 9 C
10 D 11 A 12 B 13 B 14 C 15 B 16 A
17 D 18 D

----

Clutter
Sometimes it seems that no matter how many possessions you have, you never feel secure. While 
it is reasonable to have a basic nesting instinct and create a home which (1) .... your needs, there 
is a point where the motivation for acquiring things gets out of control. Modern advertising is 
(2) .... deliberately designed to play on our insecurities. 'If you don't have one of these you will be 
a (3) .... human being' is one of the consistent (4) .... messages we receive. To discover just how 
much you are influenced, I challenge you to try not to read any advertising billboards next time you 
go down the street. These multi-million dollar messages (5) .... condition us in very persuasive ways 
without our ever realising it. We are bombarded by them - television, radio, newspapers, 
magazines, posters, tee shirts, the internet, you (6) .... it - all encouraging us to buy, buy, buy.
 
1 A quenches B stays C meets D feeds
2 A nonetheless B moreover C thereby D whatever
3 A minor B lesser C deeper D lower
4 A subdued B submerged C underlying D underhand
5 A relentlessly B fiercely C thoroughly D extremely
6 A label B tell C say D name
 
Caves
Research establishments and university departments around the world have (7) .... years of
research time in all aspects of caves, mainly their origins, their hydrology and their biology. Caves 
constitute a small but rather mysterious (8) .... of the natural environment - as such they (9) .... our 
curiosity and challenge our desire for knowledge, and consequently have had a considerable 
amount of research effort (10) .... to them. Furthermore, because of their presence as natural 
phenomena, they have had a long history of study, which has been intensified in those parts of the 
world where caves have had a direct effect on our way of life. However, the physical (11) .... 
required to visit many caves means that cave research has been less in the hands of the learned 
professors than in most other scientific fields. Indeed there is a considerable, perhaps unique,
(12) .... between the professional, scientific study of caves and the amateur studies carried out by 
those who mainly visit caves for sport.

7 A conducted B done C invested D made
8 A constituent B compartment C complement D component
9 A arouse B incite C tempt D instigate
10 A donated B bestowed C devoted D lavished
11 A agility B capacity C properties D demands
12 A underlay B overlap C stratification D dependence

Weather Watch
Countless observant people without any instruments other than their own senses originally (13) .... 
the foundations of meteorology, which has progressed since the 17th century into the highly 
technical science of today. Satellites and electronic instruments (14) .... endless weather 
information to us with the minimum of delay, computers solve in minutes abstruse mathematical 
sums at a speed beyond the capability of the human brain. Meteorological theory is peppered with 
long words which have little (15) .... to the non-professional. It sometimes seems there is no room 
left for simple weather wisdom, but nothing could be further from the (16) ..... Human experience 
is still the vital ingredient which (17) .... computed data into weather forecasts. Human observations 
can still provide unusual evidence which is of great help to professionals who are trying to (18) .... 
the mysteries of the atmosphere.

13 A spread B made C put D laid
14 A relay B diffuse C share D deal
15 A purpose B validity C meaning D message
16 A trust B honesty C truth D wisdom
17 A transports B translates C transcends D transposes
18 A untie B undo C unwrap D unravel

****

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)
1 C 2 B 3 B 4 C 5 A 6 D 7 C 8 D 9 A
10 C 11 A 12 B 13 D 14 A 15 C 16 C
17 B 18 D

----

