Survive as a driver
Does the thought of having your driving licence taken away from you not bear thinking about? Now that there are more
sophisticated detection techniques being employed by the police to catch speeding motorists, the chances of you losing
your licence have significantly increased. From time to time, all of us creep over the speed limit. If caught, we face the risk of
a heavy fine, penalty points or, worst of all, losing our licence altogether. In this way, the authorities are able to take away
your means of transport, freedom and money. Prosecuting speeding motorists is an unbeatable way of generating cash
for the government, as the motorist is an easy target and a good source of income. He's easier to catch than a thief, is
less troublesome when caught and can probably come up with the money to pay a substantial fine. Fight back now. Send
for your trial copy of How to survive as a driver and shorten the odds of getting caught in a speed trap. We'll show you how.

The Spy Who Loved Me
When she found the letter, she was devastated Here she was, living for years under the illusion that her husband was a CIA
operative, only to find out that he was, in fact , a travelling salesman, selling encyclopedias around the backwaters of the
Mississippi delta. Their life together had been a humdrum one, he away for weeks at a time 'on missions', she keeping house
and getting the children off to school. It hadn't been a problem before, though, because he had insisted this was a(n)
necessary evil, a front for him to hide behind. So there was always that element of excitement, secrecy, and there were his stories
on his return. He could certainly spin a yarn, she had to give him that. Tales of plots, kidnappings, secret signs and
assassination attempts. Midnight calls from the President, summoning him to the White House. At first, he flatly denied
it, but when she confronted him with the evidence, he broke down in tears.

PECKING ORDER
It may well be that, apart from the obvious needs like eating and drinking - the basic survival necessities - the strongest
urge people have is to fit in. If you observe the behaviour of a group of strangers put together in a room to complete a
given task, you will find that above and beyond the actual work that gets done - the organising, the delegation and so on
and so forth - a more subtle shuffling is taking place. In families, in groups of friends, roles are., to a large extent .. already
assigned and accepted (if sometimes grudgingly ), but with a new group each individual must find their place in that particular
collection. Most interestingly, if we contrast the efficiency of the group before and after this settling in, we notice a marked
difference. Once the group falls into roles, it always outperforms how it did formerly; unsurprisingly, perhaps, since it is
no longer a bunch of strangers chosen at random , but a team.

The School Contract
We require pupils of Morton Public School to abide by the rules laid out below. Once you have read them, please sign
your name on the dotted line and hand the form in to your house master. Any infringement of the rules in the future will then be
entirely your responsibility.
Smoking is strictly forbidden for all pupils except those in the sixth form, who are asked to restrict their smoking to their
common room and bedrooms. Consumption of alcohol on the school premises is not permitted under any circumstances; this
offence is punishable by instant expulsion. While you are in the uniform of Morton Public School, you are expected to behave
in a manner that does your school credit This means gentlemanly behaviour, smartness of dress and politeness of
speech. At all times, bear in mind that while you are in school uniform you are a representative of this school.

Etiquette
Miss Maud let out a tiny, nearly imperceptible sigh. She had never been a particularly patient person, but lately she had
found herself becoming bitterly resentful of anyone who wasted her time. These dinner parties, she decided, had never been
particularly enjoyable; her youth alone had given her the energy and vitality necessary to rise above the bores and the
drone of inconsequential chatter. There was nothing wrong with small talk as long as it led somewhere, developed into
deeper conversation or light-hearted banter. Not meaningless politenesses that were piled one on top of the other, on and
on. She was so tense, in fact, that whenever Mrs Pitt offered her a plate of - whatever it was this time - she had to clench
her teeth together for fear she'd give her a tongue-lashing no one would be likely to forget. And none of them seemed to
care, have the slightest idea. Colonel Roberts was listing his racehorses, one by one, and how each had done in its last
five races. Priscilla Dorkins, supposedly the beauty of the bunch (not that the competition was up to much) was telling
her neighbour (who was all ears) exactly how to tie a hair ribbon, and the consequences of getting it wrong.

The Geneva Convention
The Geneva Convention is the name given to a series of international treaties dealing with the behaviour of nations that
are waging war on one another. The initiative came from the Swiss philanthropist Henri Dunant, who had already been
inspired to found the International Red Cross after seeing the horrific neglect of wounded soldiers on the battlefield of
Solferino in 1859.
After World War Two, due to the atrocities that occurred, it was deemed necessary to update and ratify the treaties, which
fell into four parts. The first two dealt with the treatment of sick and wounded combatants (one for land war and one for
sea); the third, the treatment of prisoners of war and the last that of civilians in time of war.
Almost every nation signed, but a 1977 extension of the convention to include guerrillas fighting for self-determination or in
civil wars was signed only by about half. Conspicuous by their absence were the UK and the USA.

Belize
Belize is a tiny Central American country with a big future Located on the east coast of the isthmus facing the Caribbean
Sea, it's population is just 250,000 people and it has two cities; Belize City on the coast and Belmopan, which was constructed
in 1970 after a hurricane and subsequent tidal wave laid waste to the old capital.
The decades-old tension between Belize and neighbouring Guatemala seems to have eased , allowing Belize to
concentrate on developing and promoting its tourist industry. It is a wise choice, for it is the gem of Central America.
There have been tight controls on logging in its forests, meaning practically half remain intact - a unique achievement in
Central America. In addition, the second largest coral reef in the world lies in its coastal waters and is home to a vast
array of marine life.

Royal Jelly
Honey was the first sweetener, and formed the basis of what was probably the first alcoholic beverage (mead, no doubt
created accidentally when food was preserved in honey for the winter). There is evidence that Stone Age humans were
beekeepers, keeping swarms in crude wooden hives.
Bees collect nectar from flowers, which they convert from sucrose into fructose and glucose to produce honey. It is used
to feed the bee larvae after they reach the tender age of three days.
Prior to that they are fed with a mysterious substance called royal jelly, but after it is only for those who are destined .. to be
queens. A larva thus fed wi ll emerge ready to fight and attempt to drive off the old queen and any other rivals. To the
victor goes the hive; the rest must leave to form colonies elsewhere.

Over the Top?
A magistrate responded to a series of graffiti attacks in Ripley town centre by ordering eighteen-year-old Brian Jobs to be
jailed for six months, a sentence condemned by the accused's lawyer, Gordon Tone, as 'grossly unfair'.
The magistrate, Lawson Merton, defended his action, claiming that offenders had begun to act as if they were 'above the
law'. His harsh sentencing, he said, was intended to 'send out a message that a sea change is taking place in
courtrooms and offenders should no longer expect the softly-softly approach to continue. I am making an example of this
boy,' he said bluntly.
The offender's mother, Iris Jobs, was horrified. 'If you want to put .. your foot down, why do it with someone who threw
a bit of paint around?' She strongly hinted at the magistrate having an ulterior motive; one of the targets of her son's spray
can was Merton's new sports car.

In Brief
Police in Monkton are appealing for witnesses who might be able to shed some light on the art installations that have been
appearing around the city centre for some weeks now. Shoppers have been presented with, among other things: a dinner table
set with plates, cutlery and glasses; a mannikin on a skateboard, a banana balanced on its head; a bicycle seemingly
suspended in mid-air, complete with a model of E.T. in its basket.
Responding to the suggestion that it was no more than harmless fun, Police Superintendent Martin Fulchester responded,
'First of all, to practise any kind of art in public, you must have a licence. Secondly, if one of these things fell, it could
cause an injury, and who would we hold responsible? And finally, some of the offerings were not so innocent. The statue
of Mayor Tinsel recently had a false beard attached to it, and a sign round its neck reading "All bribes gratefully received".
Now, the mayor's been dead fifty years, but if he was alive ... '

The changing role of librarians
A combination of new technology and shifting student expectations is radically altering the job
of a college or university librarian. Many librarians now regard themselves as information brokers
who facilitate and manage access to the information resources needed for learning, teaching and
research. They agree that the pace of change has accelerated and much more content is delivered
electronically.
As a result of this, a librarian's responsibilities include information technology, knowledge
management and institutional portals, in addition to being excellent managers and interpreters of
services which may be provided from a growing range of global resources. Despite tremendous
changes within library environments, these challenges are regarded as stimulating. Librarians
respond by being flexible and adaptable in establishing a strong customer focus , requiring the
expansion of their skills to providing support to internet users and delivering e-services. Nevertheless ,
most librarians say that many traditional library skills are still applicable in the digital world.

Scientists and communication
Scientists are often accused of being poor communicators, yet there are many reasons why
scientists, in particular , should be and often are good communicators. After all, science calls
for enthusiasm and scientists often possess this engaging quality in large quantities.
Enthusiasm can be infectious, but to command the interest of readers, scientists must develop their
other innate talents: clarity, observation and knowledge.
Those scientists who are logical thinkers can usually write clearly, and the more clearly thoughts
are put across , the greater their potential value. In the same way, those who observe must take
account of subtle differences for the observations they may document as significant. Finally, those
who write must have something of intrinsic value to say.
A scientist whose work never sees the light of day has achieved nothing of worth until somebody
else hears about it. It is essential, therefore, for scientists to lay to rest the myth that
they cannot communicate, once and for all.

Nothing is impossible
Law firm Matthews and Reynolds is a shining example of a business using art to revamp its public
image. The firm hired an advertising agency called Eyeopener to carry out a rebranding exercise .
and gave the agency free rein to take the company by the scruff of the neck and effect a major
makeover. The firm wanted smart, contemporary imagery which would symbolise an innovative,
forward-thinking business.
As a result the firm now has a new logo, and all its advertising material features clever modern images
which are easy on the eye. Director Alan Ross comments: 'The images Eyeopener came up with say
a lot about our approach, size and experience. And we were delighted with the advertising campaign
they subsequently devised , using a stylish, sophisticated approach with a touch of humour here
and there.'
Public response to the rebranding has been excellent, and what appeared to be a dusty old law
firm has been given a new lease of life as an adventurous and confident concern.

Photography at its most daring
Photographers who have worked so close to volcanoes that their clothes started to burn, come
within stroking distance of tigers in the wild, or dived under sea ice in freezing cold water have
joined forces for an exhibition, billed as displaying images from the harshest places on
Earth
Polar bears and seals were captured on camera by a photographer who grew up in the Arctic
and trained as a marine biologist. He dives under sea ice to swim with his subjects, once
offending a leopard seal by refusing the penguin she tried to feed him with. Another exhibitor has
recorded not only tigers but also chimpanzees that had never before encountered human beings.
The volcano enthusiasts work in fireproof suits, always at risk of becoming so transfixed by the
beauty of the eruptions that they venture too close. There are invisible pockets of gas as well as
flames, all of which contribute to the deadly perils of being an extreme photographer.

England's breakfast revolution
The importance of a good breakfast is beyond dispute according to health experts, but in
historical terms breakfast is a relatively new arrival in England, with descriptions of breakfast
seldom featuring in medieval literature. Admittedly , there are scattered references to travellers
having a meal at dawn before embarking on arduous journeys, and to the sick sitting down to
breakfast for medicinal reasons, but most people went without unless they were monarchs
or nobles.
However, in the sixteenth century it gradually became the norm , not the exception. Some
writers have attributed this to the greater availability of food. Proponents of this view have not
always considered other profound social changes. For example, new patterns of employment
may well offer a plausible explanation for the greater importance now attached to breakfast,
as individuals were increasingly employed for a prescribed number of hours. Often this involved
starting work extremely early. Thus, having a meal first thing in the morning was rooted ~ .. in
necessity, and was no longer associated with social status alone.

The way we see the things around us
'Pastry,' once wrote a cookery expert, 'like horses and children, seems to sense if you are
afraid of it and plays up accordingly ' Had she been writing today, she might well have mentioned that
computers are just the same. Like small children, they do not respond well to force, and just as
one way of dealing with a fractious child is to send it to its room to cool off, so quite often,
if the machine is giving trouble, the first thing to try is simply switching it off and doing something
else; quite why the machine works perfectly when you boot it up again I have no idea.
Attributing human emotions and feelings to inanimate objects is, of course, extremely unscientific;
it's only those who don't understand machines who believe that they behave like people. But I
would maintain that, although treating machines like people may be misguided, it is preferable ,
in general, to treating people like machines.

A Cosmic Directory
Scientists at Puerto Rico University in Arecibo have recently launched a cosmic directory that lists
the planets and moons most likely to harbour alien life. They created the catalogue to make sense
of the ever-increasing number of distant worlds that are visible with modern telescopes. They
believe it will help astronomers, and others with an interest, to compare faraway worlds and keep
tabs on the most habitable ones as researchers discover them.
The catalogue ranks the habitability of planets and moons according to three criteria : their
surface temperature, their similarity to Earth and their capacity to sustain organisms that
lurk at the bottom of the food chain. It suggests that among hundreds of candidates, only
a few planets are potentially habitable, and gives high scores for habitability to even fewer. The
database also holds information on the location of the planets, their probable mass and the type
and age of the stars they orbit.

The importance of saving plastic
Many artefacts of enduring cultural significance from the last century were made from plastic.
It was always confidently assumed that this rather mundane material was virtually
indestructible. Now that some of these artefacts have become museum pieces , we have
discovered that this notion was sadly mistaken.
The degradation of plastics is worrying both scientists and historians, who are racing against
time to save our plastic heritage before it crumbles into dust. Our love affair with plasti_cs
stems in large part from the fact they can be moulded into just about any shape imaginable.
When it comes to longevity, however, they have a serious flaw : their chemical structure
breaks down when they are exposed to air and sunlight.
Many now argue that we must consider the cultural legacy we will be leaving future
generations. Without urgent intervention many artefacts will be lost forever. But developing
effective conservation strategies is difficult because what works to preserve one type of plastic
can have a catastrophic effect on the lifespan of another.

Australian Cinema
Thirty years ago, the New Australian cinema captured the attention of the world with heroic stories set
in the !ate-nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries. They were tales of the formation of a national
identity , of the recent settlers transactions with their strange new world and its frighteningiy mystical
inhabitants. When this vein was exhausted , local film makers left home or turned to the problematic
present of people living lives of noisy desperation in the sprawling suburbs of the big coastal cities,
home to most Austraiians. As television series, these cosy, unheroic stor1es achieved worldwide
popularity, but re!ative!y few films of this sort have found success elsewhere, except for a small 
handful  among which are these highly accomplished and caiculatedly theatrical films. They are
loving assemblages of conventions and cliches from the musicals of the past, produced with an
exuberance that sweeps the audience up in uncriticai enjoyment.

Making The Magnificent Seven
Aklra Kurosawa's 1954 classic Seven Samurai is about a bunch of down-on-their-luck warriors who
agree to defend a small village from a band of thieves in exchange for three meals a day and much
honour. Since Kurosawa's major influence was the epic Westerns of John Ford, it is ironic that
in 1959 Hollywood thought Samurai would make a good cowboy film and The Magnificent Seven
appeared on the screen. Originally, Yul Brynner was to direct the remake but after much argument ,
director John Sturges took the helm Aside from Broadway actor Eli Wallach, Brynner was the
oniy famous name in the movie; Steve McQueen, Charles Bronson, Robert Vaughn and James Coburn
got their career changing roles by word of mouth. Now, in this digitaliy rejigged version you can
find out what happened on the action-filled set via an exclusive new documentary and how the fi!m
nearly did not become the revered classic it is today.

The Rothschilds
When, in the 18th century, Mayer Amschel Rothschild abandoned his studies to join a banking firm in
his native Frankfurt, he took the first steps towards creating one of the most successful, and most
influentiai, banks.
For nearly two centuries, the fortunes of the British government and those of the bank were
fundamentally !inked Thanks to the Rothschilds, the Duke of Wellington was able to pay his army
in 1814-15 (the bank received a 2% commission on the deal). Ten years later, the Rothschilds again
came to the rescue when 145 British banks faiied, helping prevent the collapse of the whole UK
banking system.
The 19th century Prime Minister, Benjamin Disraeli, believed one of his great political coups to be
the acquisition of enough shares in the Suez Cana! to secure Britain a controliing interest Again,
thanks to a £4 million Rothschild loan. Today, the company ranks among the world's largest
privately owned banks, with 40 offices in 30 different countries.

Michael Faraday
Michael Faraday was one of the most influential scientists in the entire history of science. One of his
inventions, a dynamo, is regarded as a forerunner of modern power genenerators.
Despite having little in the way of formal education, Faraday was a prodigious reader and autodidact
and soon came to the attention of the scientific estabiishment. He first set forth on the path
of his professional life as assistant to the renowned scientist Sir Humphrey Davy. Although working for
Sir Davy brought Faraday into contact with many scientists, he also had to endure class
discrimination and was regarded as little more than a servant by the Davy famiiy. It was perhaps due
to their mistreatment that Faraday rejected the offer of the presidency of the Royal Society out of
hand in later life.
Apart from his scientific breakthroughs, Faraday was involved in many projects for the British
government. One of the projects he undertook was to investigate coal mine explosions. Unfortunately,
the government deemed his report inconclusive and it was to be another 60 years before his warnings
were heeded.

Hi Tech Cricket
The Hawk-eye system has made a great deal of difference to the sports of tennis and cricket in recent
years. The system, which is a good example of how military technology can be used for peaceful
purposes , is based on missile tracking technology. The system works by placing high speed cameras
at different iocations and angles around the cricket fieid or area of play and using the data
provided by the cameras to analyse the trajectory of a ball to help cricket and tennis umpires make
accurate decisions. It is especially useful for such difficult decisions as LBW in cricket (leg before
wicket) when the umpire must determine whether the bali would have hit the stumps had the batsman's
leg not got in the way. Modern bowlers deliver the bali at such incredible speeds that umpires can
have difficulty in foliowing the bali with the naked eye.
The software in the system can predict with an accuracy of 5mm the direction of a ball and at the
same time collect statistical data on the height the ba!I and the speed it travelled at. This means that
fiercely disputed decisions in tennis and cricket can be definitively settled.

Sharing a Room
Before starting university, I hadn't given more than a passing thought to what could go wrong
sharing a room with another student. I had simply assumed that my roommate-to-be would be rather
like me - at university to have fun but mainly to learn. Within a couple of weeks, I was all too
aware that my fun-loving Scottish roommate, Thomas, was at university to do a great deal of the former
but very little of the latter .
Every evening, I would be tucked up in bed by midnight, exhausted from the day's activities. But the
midnight hour was precisely when Thomas' night began. First, a constant stream of people
would start traipsing in and out of our room until a general consensus had been reached on how the
night would best be spent Next, preparations for the night would ensue; phone calls would
be made, outfits chosen. If I was lucky, Thomas would be gone by 1 :30am. But by 6:30am, he and two
or three of his mates would be back, keen to dissect the night's activities. At which point, the
smile I always endeavoured to plaster firmly on my face would be wearing dangerously thin.
Despite all this, Thomas and I remained firm friends throughout university. Although I do
confess that our friendship was helped along rather a lot by the fact that we both found new
roommates before the first month was out!

Young at Heart
Sociologists suggest certain cultures have almost eradicated the word 'old' from their
vocabulary. Linguistically speaking, people are just not allowed to be old anymore. At a(n)
push they can be 'elderly', but more often than not they are 'senior citizens', 'older adults'
or one of a host of other euphemisms.
It's true that grandparents these days, while not necessarily younger in years than those of past
generations, are definitely younger in spirit. One is increasingly hard pressed to find a sixtysomething
sitting quietly at home watching TV, waiting for the grandchildren to call round. No, today's
over-sixties are out and about. They are socialising, running marathons, travelling the
world. They look better than ever, are more independent than ever, and even put many
twenty-somethings to shame when it comes to fitness.
Clearly, there is much to be said for this development. Society can no longer mindlessly
relegate its elderly to the scrap heap. Still, the expectation for youthful vigour in the elderly
does have its downsides. The prerogatives of the over-sixties since time immemorial -
aching joints, reduced energy, mental fogginess - are becoming increasingly unacceptable. Nowadays,
to actually behave as though you are in your twilight years is almost frowned upon.

Risotto
Although pasta usually grabs the spotlight when it comes to Italian cooking, rice is also a
common staple found on tables across Italy. Indeed, whereas southern Italians eat pasta every day
without fail , northern Italians eat risotto: a dish of rice and various other ingredients cooked
slowly in a rich stock until creamy in consistency .
The history of risotto is naturally tied to the history of rice in Italy. Rice probably arrived on
the peninsula sometime during the 10th century, brought to Sicily by Arab conquerors. Agriculturally,
Italy turned out to be perfect for cultivating rice. The lie of the land, the availability
of water, and the Mediterranean humidity is just right for growing the short-grained rice varieties that
are essential for a risotto.
It was in the Lombardia, Veneta, and Piemonte regions of Northern Italy in the 15th century that rice
met its destiny. Slow-cooking dominated the culinary landscape of the region. These slowcooking
principles, combined with the local rice and rich flavours and spices for which the area was
known, created risotto. A quintessential Italian dish, risotto is Northern Italy's famous and much-loved
contribution to the world's cuisine.

The Irish Potato Famine
The Irish Potato Famine of 1845-1850 was one of the worst calamities ever to befall Ireland.
Just five short years of famine saw Ireland's population plummet by a quarter, as one
million people starved to death and another million fled the country and went abroad.
By the mid 1800s, one third of Ireland's population was entirely dependent on potatoes for
nourishment. Sporadic potato crop failures were a regular feature of Irish life, but the blight
which struck Ireland's potato crop in i845 was so severe it eclipsed all others. Caused by the
fungus Phytophthora infestans, the blight turned potatoes into a slimy, decaying, blackish 'mass of
rottenness'. In i845 the blight claimed one third of Ireland's potato crop; in i8461 one half;
then, in i847, Ireland's entire potato crop failed.
The result was human and cultural catastrophe. Whole counties were almost entirely depopulated. The
Gaelic language nearly died out Today, many historians regard the Irish Potato Famine as a
major turning point in Ireland's history as, after it, Ireland's demographic, political, and cultural
landscape was changed forever.

Mt Vesuvius
Mention Italy's legendary volcano, Vesuvius, to most people and the image that will spring .
to their minds is the famous eruption of 79 AD that wiped out the Roman cities of Pompeii and
Herculaneum. But, according to some experts who consider the volcano the most dangerous in the
world, Vesuvius may well awaken sometime in the near future with even more catastrophic
results. The prospect, which could spell disaster for the three million people who live in the
immediate vicinity of the volcano, has stirred up vigorous debate among scientists and civil
authorities on how to prepare for such an event.
A key issue is the likely scale of future eruptions. Many geologists believe Vesuvius is due
a massive eruption. Others argue that the eruptive nature of Vesuvius has changed over time, and that
smaller eruptions are now the norm Any disaster preparation planning depends entirely
on which scenario civil authorities choose as their basis. Currently, authorities have a plan in
place that will allow the 600,000 people living at Vesuvius's base to be evacuated seventytwo
hours ahead of an impending eruption. But no plan exists for a worst case scenario event: a
massive eruption which would demand the evacuation of all three million of Naples' residents.

Bubble Tea
Bubble tea is the latest drinks craze to hit the UK, but will the craze last? First
things first: bubble tea is milky, iced tea with small, chewy balls of tapioca dropped into the
cup. It was invented in tea shops in Taiwan during the 1980s, but it is now popular in countries all over
the world. We Brits have been fairly late in catching on to the craze, but that's probably because
of our weather. The idea of a cold bubble tea may appeal in hot and humid Taiwan, but a
steaming mug of hot chocolate is more the order of the day in wet and windy Britain. Still, better
late than never; bubble tea is now being served in shops throughout Britain.
So, what's it like? Online reviews of UK bubble tea shops are mixed Some say the bubble
tea in the UK isn't like the authentic Taiwanese stuff. Others rave about it. The opinion of this reviewer?
Well, drinking bubble tea is fun. It's kind of a meal in a drink: the tapioca balls are chewy and filling,
while the tea is refreshing and sweet. Britain may not have the perfect climate all year round .
for enjoying cold drinks, but bubble tea could still conceivably take off. Obviously, it won't replace
the traditional British habits of tea and coffee drinking. But there could well be a place for
it somewhere in the afternoon, or during weekend shopping.

Appalachia
Steep green wooded hills with alpine meadows, clinging to their sides stretched away for 
as far as the eye could see. Before me a sinuous road led down to a valley of rolling farms 
spread out along a lazy river. It was as perfect a setting as I had ever seen. I 
drove through the soft light of dusk, absorbed by the beauty.
This was the heart of Appalachia, the most severely impoverished region of the United 
States. Known for its music, and also known historically, and largely unjustly, for its isolation, for coal 
mining, and for the dearth of education of its inhabitants, it is also one of the most misunderstood 
regions. But to my eye above all else, it was simply inexpressibly beautiful.
It seemed strange to think that the urban professionals of the Eastern Seaboard cities hadn’t 
colonised an area of such arresting beauty, filling the dales with rustic weekend cottages, 
country clubs and fancy restaurants. At a second glance however, there were a handful 
of quaint cottages dotted among the farms. Perhaps Appalachia was on the cusp of 
establishing a new identity.

Benefit Fraud
Once or twice a year, William Hitt, a top class con artist, dressed up to play the
part of a severely disabled man. According to authorities, he often went
so far as to strap on an arm brace and sit in a wheelchair during visits to the benefit office. Hitt
had claimed that an injury to his right hand, and the subsequent bungled treatment
using bone from his leg, had left him in considerable pain, unable to walk, and in need
of constant assistance.
The Criminal and Financial Investigation team, who began investigating Hitt last year after they
were tipped off that he was conning the authorities into thinking that he was disabled,
estimate that his fraudulent claims amount to more than £400,000 in the form of
housing benefits, aid from the Independent Living Fund, income support and disability living
allowance.
The evidence against Hitt, presented at his trial, included photos of him shopping, video
filmed by the Metropolitan Police of him walking unaided, as well as a video of him dancing at a
wedding. At Isleworth Crown Court, he was convicted of 12 counts of fraud, including
deception and making false statements.

Singapore

Singapore is a young and diverse country. It has expanded from only about
a thousand residents in the early 1800s to more than 5 million today. Around 40 percent
of the populace is foreign-born and there are four official languages: English,
Chinese, Malay and Tamil. Religions are even more numerous . Indeed, racial and
religious harmony is regarded by the government to be essential, and a part of the
national identity.
Singaporeans tend to consider their nation an outpost of progress in an untidy world – a
19th century English colonial outlook transposed into a ‘modern’ Asia grounded
on hard work and intelligence. That’s understandable, for Singapore is an object lesson
in how to set national priorities – and follow through on them
year upon year. Healthcare and Education are consistently good when compared
globally, and its economy has been called one of the freest, most innovative, most
competitive and most business-friendly.
From an inhospitable swampland has emerged a modern affluent city-state – part
financial services centre, part hi-tech manufacturer, part trading hub to its less developed
neighbours. Few doubt that, by the end of the decade, living standards in
Singapore will be on a par with any country in the world.

ENVIRONMENTAL PHOTOGRAPHY
Many of the species that survive the current wave of extinctions, perpetrated by man's
destruction of the world's natural landscape, will be quasi-domesticated residents of wildlife
preserves. Their original wilderness will be reproduced as tiny enclaves, landscaped by foam rocks
and bounded by walls of iron.
Recognising this, I have no desire to perpetuate the romantic mirages of traditional wildlife
photography. Instead, I create images of animals in their new reality, from that lost Eden, stranded
on a small planet quickly becoming alien to them. It is a new kind of landscape, one largely
devoid of typical topography, but it is the place they must now reside.
Some of the photographic techniques I have used to symbolise that new landscape have been
borrowed from contemporary advertising photography, whose contrived perfection is
aimed at creating desire for superfluous goods such as cosmetics and high-fashion clothing.
In a sense, the use of these techniques is a(n) ironic commentary on our society, which
is so adept at turning the meaningless into the priceless. I hope my photographs challenge us to
revise our perceptions enough to separate the truly priceless from the meaningless.

Origins of the Net
The Internet, as a concept, is actually older than most of its users; born, as it was, in
the sixties. While there is no doubting that the Net's claim to fame today is the
quantum leap in global communications it has fostered, the idea of the Net was
not, in fact, hatched in a bid to make information easily accessible to everyone, but
rather in a contest for world domination.
Following the Soviet successes in beating the US into space, the US Department of Defence
formed the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA). Twelve years later the ARPA
spawned ARPAnet, the world's first decentralised computer network.
The driving force behind decentralisation, ironically, was bomb-proofing. Hit a
mainframe and the system goes down But bombing a network would, at worst,
only remove one or two nodes. The remainder could route around it unharmed.
At the time of its inception, its creators would likely have been greatly perturbed at the
prospect of its anarchic extension into the public domain.

An Australian Name
The name I answered to in my early years was Vivian James. Later on, my mother gave me the
choice of first names and I picked Clive out of a Tyrone Power movie. She sympathised with the
fix she had got me into by naming me after Vivian McGrath, one of the
1938 Davis Cup squad. After Vivian Leigh played Scarlett O'Hara in "Gone with the Wind", the
name became irrevocably a girl's name no matter how you spelled it, so those few little
boys who had been saddled with it at birth were unintentionally put through an ordeal
Perhaps it made us stronger. Research indicates that it at least increases levels of self control –
we might not fight more but we learn early to let things roll off our backs,
Likewise experts opine that names, good or bad, don't matter much provided people
have anything else to base their impressions on. 
This could be a good thing, or a bad thing. Australians are still inclined to give their
offspring names connected with the world of the movies or sports. So while the children
may by unlikely to emulate their famous namesakes, they are equally unlikely to be
judged in the future if their namesake should become unpopular.

Equine Superstar
Unlike their two-legged counterparts in the world of sport, horses that become household names are few
and far between. Indeed, it might be claimed that only the names Seattle Slew in the US and Red Rum in
the UK had truly permeated the confines of the racing world to capture the public's imagination before 2012.
That was the year when Frankel made his mark and catapulted the sport of horseracing into the
spotlight. As his victories became more impressive, the interest in him mounted to such a degree that his
exploits made front page news. Before his final race, in which he was attempting to keep his unbeaten
record intact, there were doubts he would handle the very soft ground, which favoured a highly regarded
French rival. However, as racing history shows, these fears proved groundless as Frankel cruised past Cirrus
Des Aigles to confirm he was a racehorse the likes of which we will probably never see again.

Visiting Antarctica
For those intrepid travellers who wish to explore every corner of the globe, Antarctica, which is still
considered to be off the beaten track , is likely to be high on the list of must-visit destinations. This vast
white wilderness attracts around 35,000 visitors per year, but the experience of marvelling at the diversity
of wildlife and stunning scenery does not come cheap. A typical passenger on a specially adapted ship
can expect to fork out at least £4,000, but if price is no object , there are far more expensive alternatives.
Travel agents' clients who prefer to take off into the more remote interior can stay in opulent camps that
are dismantled at the end of the season. The price tag for such a stay can reach £20,000.
No matter what kind of visit is selected, the Antarctic never fails to deliver on its promise of the holiday
of a lifetime on the most sparsely populated land mass on the planet.

Hype
Several weeks before the release of a new film, or the launch of a new product, the marketing magicians
go into overdrive. They whet the appetites of potential consumers with an advertising campaign that convinces
the target market that what they are promoting is a must see, have or do entity. This is accomplished by using
hype, which despite having negative connotations , almost invariably succeeds in boosting sales.
Given that hype is widely known to involve both exaggeration and falsification, it is rather interesting
that people are so readily hoodwinked by the marketing strategists' representations. It is as if they want to
believe the illusion will somehow create a peak of happiness to revive their flat-lining emotions. Whether
that joy is real or imaginary is of little consequence since the stimulation that occurs in the brain is, to all
intents and purposes , the same.
So, it is not merely a case of hype fooling the consumer time and again , but one in which it signposts a
way to escape the drudgery of daily routine. As such, hype guides consumers to a product that may fulfil ..
their needs and consumer behaviour gives credence to the existence of hype. It is a symbiotic relationship.

Cyber Bully
Before the advent of social networking, a school bully was more often than not a physically imposing
individual with low self-esteem who positively enjoyed causing pain and suffering. Together with his cronies,
he would actively seek out those he could intimidate without any fear of getting a taste of his own
medicine from a victim's older brother or relative. To avoid losing money, a packed lunch or beating, the bully's
target had to take evasive action by giving his tormentor a wide berth at all times.
Nowadays there is a new breed of tormentor - the cyber bully. Although these people do not have to
meet the physical requirements of their predecessors, they can easily impose substantial psychological
damage on those they set their sights on. What is more, there is no hiding place for the victims as
they become an object of derision and ridicule for every member of the virtual community who has seen an
incriminating image or read a damning accusation.
This insidious use of social networks is just one example of the harm they can do. As a result, many observers
are not yet prepared to sing their praises without reservation.

Personality and Preference
'You can't judge a book by its cover' goes the saying, and if the frequency of its use is anything to go
by, there are plenty of people willing to vouch for its validity. However, it might be that this saying requires
modification since several psychological studies have revealed strong associations between personality traits
and aesthetic tastes. Although researchers have guarded against making sweeping generalisations, they can, to
a fair extent, establish links between an individual's characteristics and preferences with regard to media.
Through extensive research, psychologists have determined that someone who is social is likely to gravitate
towards songs, magazines and television shows in the public eye . Alternatively, those who are highly .
emotional will probably turn to culture and art for comfort or distraction. Thus, personality holds tremendous
sway over what a person reads, listens to or watches. So, given these findings, adding 'but the cover of the book
reflects the personality of its reader' might make it more complete.

History
In spite of their best intentions , historians have been unable to report history without incorporating
elements of bias and selection into their accounts. This inability to eliminate any subjective input has given
rise to doubts about the reliability of our knowledge of past events.
Such distortion of the truth occurred during a recent episode of 'Storage Wars' on the History Channel.
In this particular episode, a young couple made the highest bid for an abandoned storage locker
containing two safes. In the safes, there were a number of coins, one of which was a 1933 Double Eagle that
came with a certificate of authenticity. later in the programme, while they were having the coins appraised,
no mention of the gold coin was made. As a result, the couple were said to have made a profit of a few
thousand dollars, which was far too low an estimate as the last 1933 Double Eagle sold at auction fetched .
over $7 million. This omission may have been justified for a number of reasons, but it certainly led viewers
up the garden path.

Mind Control
Over forty years ago, when the plug was pulled on an infamous government-run project on mind control,
there was a collective sigh of relief. Now, nearly half a century later, new research into meddling with
people's minds is causing concern that advanced mind-control techniques may be used for sinister purposes.
Though such fears may be warranted, there are simpler mind manipulation techniques that lie much
closer to home. One such technique involves offering an incentive in the form of cash or a sense of
belonging. It is probably the oldest trick in the book, but it can be just as effective as chemicals or brain
implants. Another less sophisticated way to exert influence requires the introduction of a stimulus into
the environment when the desired beliefs are being triggered. This method is particularly effective when the
stimulus, such as a casual remark, seems natural.
The shutdown of one government project did not mark the end of mind control as it is part and parcel of
daily life. However, with the new research being so promising, advanced techniques may be about to take
manipulation to a whole new level.

Greenhouse Gas Alert
Friday 10 May 2013 was a climate milestone in human history. It was the day when data released by the carbon
dioxide monitoring stations at Mauna Loa revealed that the greenhouse gas had reached its highest level for
more than three million years. The 400 ppm barrier , which was last broken during the Pliocene era, is
regarded as an indication that the increase in global average temperature is approaching the
point of no return.
Although the catastrophic consequences of climate change do not appear to be just round the corner ,
various regions across the world are already feeling the effects of rising temperatures. Wet and cold spells
during European summers, for example, have been linked to changes in the high-level jet stream winds
caused by melting sea ice in the Arctic, which has now shrunk to its lowest level.
Despite views to the contrary , the rising carbon dioxide levels are cause for concern. If this warning sign goes
unheeded, we are in danger of turning back the climate clock to a time when humans did not roam this planet.

A Cultural Perspective on Time
Although the concept of time can be considered universal since it is governed by the laws of physics, some
people hold the view that language and culture can metaphorically divide us with regard to how we
perceive the passage of time. In the majority of Inda-European languages there is general consensus that
the past is behind us and the future lies ahead. However, unlike physics, this assumption is not universal. In
the Aymara culture, a conflicting set of temporal metaphors is in operation The Aymara picture themselves
rowing along in time, so their past is in front of them and their future is at their back. This perception is
reflected in their language as the literal translation of the phrase meaning a long time ago is 'a long time in
front of you'.
At first glance , this Aymara metaphor may appear strange, but the assertion actually fits in with our
experience of time, as we can see what has gone before but we cannot definitively see what is to come.
This specific example of what a tiny minority in South America has to offer in terms of understanding
the world we live in surely lends overwhelming support to the case for preserving cultural diversity.

Tactile Art Show
As humans develop through the various life stages spanning the period from birth to death, they acquire
knowledge about the world around them through, among other things, sensory perception. Therefore,
one would be hard pressed to argue the fact that being born blind puts one at a disadvantage. The
unsighted baby ... child ... teen ... adult will have a different conception of shape, mass, size and colour
than their sighted counterparts It is common knowledge, however, that when a person is deprived of the
input obtained through one of the senses, the other senses become heightened in an effort to compensate
for the impeded sense. That being the case, touch becomes a crucial source of information to a visuallyimpaired
person. As illustrated by the Touch Art Fair, it can also pave the way for the unsighted to
appreciate art in all its glorious forms Said to be the first of its kind in the UK, the fair, a non-profit
organisation, seeks to redefine what it means to 'view' art.

Hollywoodland to Hollywood
When you think of Hollywood the primary image that springs to mind is movies, of the big box office
variety But it is easy to forget that it has not always existed and, before its rise to prominence as the epicentre of
motion pictures, it was a distant unknown town with only a very small outpost for film. Back then, New York
was the centre of the movie-making industry, and it was not until a few independent studios had
established themselves that Hollywood started to have any relevance on the map.
There were a number of factors, though, that helped its success along in the early days. Los Angeles boasts
pretty much 365 days of sunshine, making it a paradise for filming. Moreover, there is a(n) abundance of natural
features providing a great variety of different locations in which to shoot films. Those physical factors,
coupled with the low price of property and the fact that there were no restrictions being imposed by movie
conglomerates, made it an independent film director's dream.
Soon film factories abounded and it was only a matter of time before a studio system was put in place to
ensure the quality of the movies produced. This system made it the movie centre not only of the US but of the
world and the European film industries are still, to this day, fighting to keep up.

Strengthening Company Culture
In this age of hyper-connectivity, teleworking is easier than ever before, yet major companies seem
to be thinking twice about it. From a logistics point of view, this doesn't make sense: having fewer
employees on site equals lower costs and allowing staff to deal with practical or personal issues by
working from home increases productivity. For the discerning CEO, however, who's able to look at the
bigger picture, it also means a sharp decrease in the value each individual worker brings to the company
and the danger posed to the corporate identity .
The explanation is that gathering round the coffee vending machine is not perceived as idling or
skiving off work anymore, but as an opportunity to share information and bounce ideas off each other,
tap into colleagues' knowledge or get an alternative perspective. Much as it has been challenged
as a concept, workplace bonding is what ultimately encourages people to share in the company culture
and this is not something that can be done online.

Cheetah: not your average big cat
That the cheetah is the fastest of the big cats is beyond dispute and common knowledge
with it having reportedly been clocked at speeds in excess of 70mph. However. whilst it has impressive
acceleration over short distances. it could not conceivably sustain such speeds for any significant
length of time. Therefore, when hunting, it relies largely on the element of surprise to
use its speed to good advantage. Otherwise. in a prolonged hunt. it will prove wanting in
the stamina department and generally have to abandon the chase.
Still on the subject of running. incredibly, a sprinting cheetah is actually completely
airborne more than fifty percent of the time. Indeed. at full throttle its single stride length
is an impressive seven metres.
Cheetahs are peculiar amongst big cats, though, because, aside from their breath-taking speed. their
performance in other areas actually leaves a lot to be desired For instance, their nocturnal
vision is little better than our own. Uncharacteristically for a big cat, too, females are inclined
to be loners, whilst it is males that are more likely to congregate , frequently in groups up to
five. The collective noun for a group of male cheetahs is a coalition.

Shark myth busted
Sharks undeniably have a very bad rap thanks to sensationalised stories in film and
the media; stories which cause them to be identified as dangerous. indiscriminate killers, prepared to hunt
anything in sight. However. the reality could not be further removed from this misperception .
Indeed. far from being the fearsome man eaters they are frequently depicted as. the
reverse is more often true and sharks are generally victims of humanity. For instance. millions are killed
annually for consumption in soup, leading to depleting shark numbers worldwide.
So, whilst sharks are undeniably food for humans. the reverse is seldom true. Sharks do not prey on people
per se, and the overwhelming majority of shark attacks are a case of mistaken identity
(Surfers. for instance. look remarkably similar in profile to seals from the depths of the ocean.
where sharks lie in wait which explains why they are often considered most at risk.)
Besides. the majority of shark species are incapable of tackling prey the size of humans and instead feed
on small fish, or invertebrates such as squid or clams. Indeed. the impressive diversity of
shark species is reflected in the fact that there are also many filter feeders. which dine on microscopic sea
life. such as plankton.
To put the figures in greater context there are over one hundred million sharks killed
by humans every year whilst there are typically fewer than ten shark-related human fatalities.

(Kind of) on the scent of cancer
Dogs can boast a range of impressive skills in their portfolio. from leading the blind
to carrying out mountain rescues to apprehending those with contraband goods at border
control posts. Unquestionably, they have extremely heightened . senses compared to us
humans and, recently, scientists have been investigating the precise extent of their talents
in relation specifically to their sense of smell. ln short. they wanted to find out if man's best friend could
sniff out cancer.
Indeed. this notion has been around for a while, perpetuated on the internet for the most part,
where anecdotal evidence abounds in the form of countless stories of family dogs persistently smelling
certain areas of their owner's body. areas later shown to be cancerous. However, whilst the canine sense
of smell is unquestionably astounding thus far at least, there appears to be little scientific
basis for a canine cancer screening program.
The problem is that whilst studies have shown that dogs are right about cancer more often than could
be explained by pure chance. their detection rates are not high enough to make them reliable
for screening purposes. Besides, there already exist numerous cancer tests that are far more accurate and
effective for this purpose.
Therefore, sadly, whilst man's best friend undoubtedly has some very impressive tricks in his repertoire,
he will not be turning up in cancer units any time soon other than to comfort his loved ones in their
time of distress. This writer. for one. though. thinks that purpose is sufficiently meritorious in and of itself.

The best stargazing sites in the world
If stargazing is high on your list of vacation to dos. a destination worthy of serious
consideration is the Atacama Desert. The reason for this is simple enough: for optimal
viewing pleasure. you need cloudless skies. which the Atacama provides in abundance on account of
it being one of the driest places on earth. Indeed, the area around America's Grand Canyon makes an
excellent viewing location for similar reasons. with its equally arid terrain and
low precipitation levels. What both places also guarantee is a very low population density given their
remoteness This is pivotal to successful stargazing. which the abundant lighting of built-up
areas only serves to sabotage.
The island of La Palma though. can usually go one better. Not only does it have a relatively low population
density. but a regularly occurring natural weather phenomenon ensures that the island's upper
elevations are typically shielded from what little interlerence there is from sources of
artificial luminescence.This phenomenon of inversion results in a blanket of low-lying cloud
situated at about one thousand metres. Above that altitude, the skies are blissfully clear. making conditions
truly idyllic for staring into the heavens. Of course. there is a multitude of other good
sites for stargazing scattered around the globe too. not least the vast Australian bush. However. La Palma
probably tops them all on account of its accessibility and viewing conditions. which.
combined. conspire·to make it as near perlect as a stargazing destination can get.

Esperanto
When LL Zamenhof constructed the auxiliary language of Esperanto in the late 1800s,
he did so with certain key goals in mind: to render the study of language easier and
more learner-friendly; and to develop a universal language as a means of international communication
and as a mechanism for promoting concord and understanding in a discordant world. His
goals were influenced very much by his own experiences of growing up in Bialystok, which is part of
modern-day Poland. A multitude of different ethnic groups lived there at the time and were constantly
quarrelling with one another. It was this at which Zamenhof despaired. and he reasoned that
the underlying cause of dispute was the barriers to communication present on account of the
lack of a common language. Therefore, he set out to create one: Esperanto.
His goals were incredibly ambitious, but was the new language a success? Well, in so far as it is the
most widely spoken artificial one in existence today, with an estimated two-plus-million people worldwide
fluent to some degree, you would have to say yes. However, the fact remains that Esperanto has not
usurped English as the lingua franca of international communication, nor has it been nearly
so widely embraced as Zamenhof himself would have hoped.
Therefore. judged against Zamenhof's own lofty . ambitions for the language. the
conclusion could not be in the affirmative. That said, his intentions in building an entirely new language
were incredibly noteworthy and that the language has prospered even to the extent that it
has done. with millions of active speakers. is. in and of itself, quite remarkable.

The North Coast 500
Pitched as Scotland's answer to America's Route 66, the North Coast 500, as the name would
imply is a roughly five-hundred-mile coastal route around the northernmost part of the
island of Britain. It was conceived by the Scottish tourist authority as an effort to inject
new life into the remote, rural Highlands by attracting a new wave of foreign tourists.
Much hype accompanied the launch of the new route, but does it really live up to its billing .
as one of the greatest road trips on the planet?
Well, as the circular route skirts the top-most part of the island. it certainly offers its
fair share of spectacular scenery. There are fairy-tale castles aplenty, pristine beaches
with not a soul to be found on them. which you can truly have all to yourself for so long as you wish. and.
between the ancient ruins and the incredibly scenic and oft-misty landscapes. there is also more than
enough romanticism to go round.
That's not bad for a start. but the routehasothersurprises in store. too. such as the plethora .
of quaint little villages dotted along its way, not to mention the incredibly friendly and welcoming local folk
who call these places home. Hospitality is very much the order of the day ln these parts.
So, as eplc motoring routes go, the North Coast 500 certainly ticks all the right
boxes. It is, unquestionably, therefore. worthy of serious consideration for all those eager road-trippers
out there.

Football and the opera
They are two words you would probably think it highly unlikely to find in the same
sentence - football and opera - yet. strange as it may seem. the popularity of one of opera's best-known
arias owes much to the beautiful game. Ask anyone to name an opera piece they know
and Nessun dorma will invariably be one of the first that spring to mind. From the opera
Turandot. it is a love song sung by an eager prince looking to woo the beautiful princess
which the opera itself is named after. However, the question is. opera being an art often seen as the exclusive
domain of the upper classes. how on earth did this humble aria manage to transcend
class in its appeal in quite the manner which it has done?
Well. it all started at the 1 990 World Cup, hosted by Italy. The aria was periormed there by
Luciano Pavarotti before a huge television audience which would otherwise likely never have been
exposed to such an operatic piece. Pavarotti's rendition proved hugely popular
and the aria went on to become one of the best-selling classical hits of all time. Opera. it seemed. had
found a most unlikely new home - in the hearts of football fans across the world.
Indeed, Nessun dorma has remained hugely popular ever since. and its connection with football was
reaffirmed as recently as in 2016, when Leicester City capped a fairy-tale season by
claiming the Premiership crown. Following the success. their Italian manager invited his good friend tenor
Andrea Bocelli to perform the aria as part of the fans· celebration. I wonder: how many more unlikely opera
lovers did football have a hand .. in creating on that memorable day?

Hope and the human condition
Today, Vincent Van Gogh is widely regarded as one of the greatest painters of all time.
During his lifetime. however. he was a virtual unknown. Indeed, in the commercial sense,111
he was a total failure and managed to only ever sell one painting, tragically just months before his own
passin~ for the paltry sum of 400 francs.
However. Van Gogh's struggles were not solely financial. His was a life full of turbulence
and for most of it he was deeply unhappy and troubled. An aloof child. he was a disappointment to most of
his relatives. although he retained the support of his beloved brother. Theo. who financed
his training and development through most of his active years as an artist. Adulthood. however. would not
prove a happy phase of life for Van Gogh either: he was laid off from his first job as an art dealer. and. in his
own estimation , considered himself inadequate in future roles as a teacher and bookseller.
too, whether or not this was wholly true.
Desperate to find his callin~ in life. he later became a minister and missionary, but this
only prompted him to disavow religion and despair at the extent of poverty in the microcosm of the world
in which he operated. He loved passionately, too. but his advances were seldom welcomed by those he
wooed. He became, in time. more and more reclusive and experienced multiple breakdowns
and depressive episodes.
What is remarkable however, is how, amidst all the misery and sadness, he was able to
blossom as an artist creatively and produce some truly beautiful, inspiring and uplifting
work. One can only therefore marvel at the human condition. for which hope, it seems. burns long and
intensely. Fittingly perhaps. then. although Van Gogh's own candle burned out prematurely, his legacy
candle remains alight today and burns as vigorously as ever.

Agony or Ecstasy?
When comparing photographs of the opponents at the end of a tennis match, it is usually a simple
matter to distinguish the winner from the loser. The former might be punching the air in celebration ,while
the latter is down on his knees in despair. However, if you zeroin on the players' faces, you may
observe that they both have their mouths wide open and their eyes tight shut. With only their
facial expressions to go on, it can be much more difficult to arrive at a conclusion about which
player was victorious.
In moments of extreme emotion, whether positive or negative, people's facial expressions are
often remarkably similar. Indeed ,researchers have found that ifwe look at photographs of just
somebody's face, we are often at a loss to say what the person is feeling. For example, people may
confuse expressions of ecstasy and acute pain. The researchers conclude that, while we can easily
recognise the intensity of somebody's feelings by looking at their face, in order to understand the
nature of the emotion, all of their body language needs to be taken into account .

Frescoes
Fresco painting is the age-old technique which Involves painting on damp plaster walls. It is known
to have been used to decorate homes for at least 5,000 years and has probably existed in one form
or another for considerably longer. Its very nature makes it ideal for adorning large surfaces, which
explains its ubiquity in churches and government buildings. Unlike oil paintings, which are glossy
and reflect light, making it difficult to view them from certain angles, frescoes have a pleasing matt
finish. As fresco plaster bleaches relatively easily, artists do not use as wide a range of pigments as in
other types of painting, sticking mainly to pale earth tones:.
Fresco painting is considered to have reached its height in Italy during the Renaissance, with
Michelangelo being perhaps the most famous artist to employ this technique. A great many churches
in Europe boast wonderful frescoes, while more recently celebrated artists such as the renowned
Mexican muralist Diego Rivera have used the technique to great effect .

The Sky's the Limit with Podcars
The escalating problem of congestion and pollution in cities has aerospace engineers and inventors
looking to the skies for the answer. Thankfully, the goal of a safe, quiet, environmentally-friendly
form of public transport seems to be attainable in the not too distant future. Now, after being put
to the test for over a year at one terminal at Heathrow Airport, driverless podcars are officially in
operation. These small automated passenger vehicles operate on a network of specially built pathways
transporting passengers between the business car park and the main building.
Furthermore , proposals are being discussed to suspend similar podcars from a network of elevated
tracks high above busy streets in several cities. Designed to glide swiftly through the air, picking
up passengers at a host of 'portal' stops built on top of buildings, these levitating pods may one day
allow commuters to do away with train schedules and avoid congested streets by calling for a
taxi pod in advance .

Iceland
Iceland, a volcanic island situated on the Arctic Circle in the North Atlantic, has a harsh climate,
though this is mitigated to some extent by the warm ocean currents that are part of the Gulf Stream.
The first major settlements on the island were built in the 870s AD when Norse settlers arrived from
Scandinavia.
Iceland's population has experienced several periods of sharp decline over the centuries. At various
times, epidemics of the bubonic plague (commonly referred to as the Black Death) and smallpox ·
wiped out large swathes of the population. Then, in the late 18th century, a massive volcanic
eruption killed more than half of the island's livestock, and the resulting famine caused the death of
about a quarter of Iceland's residents.
Modern Iceland has a vibrant society, which has boosted its agricultural capabilities by harnessing
the island's geothermal energy. Its scenic beauty, natural geothermal geysers and hot pools and
welcoming locals, make Iceland a perfect holiday destination. Little wonder then, that tourism also
contributes significantly to the Icelandic economy.

My Introduction to Theatre
My only previous exposure to theatre had been lavish productions staged at large West End venues
where no expense had been spared on the sumptuous costumes and scenery .. So I was quite (2) __ _
when I accompanied a friend to a play at her local community centre.
For a start, I hadn't bargained for the ugly stark concrete architecture of the centre. My realisation
that the stage was simply one comer of an ordinary classroom adorned with nothing more than a
few stacks of empty plastic milk crates dampened my expectations still further. I was on the verge of
walking out when the small cast of scruffily-attired actors appeared. However, it was immediately
obvious that these performers had no need of fine costumes and props; they were clearly in their
element . I was whisked away on a whirlwindt our of the imagination, with the cast conjuring up a
magical fantasy world that left me simply spellbound and more emotionally involved than I could
ever have imagined. What an experience!

Starfish
There exists a sea creature whose simple yet beautiful outward appearance is a cause of delight - the
starfish. Their name notwithstanding , starfish are not fish; they are a type of marine invertebrate, found in
both shallow and deep waters. Starfish come in all shapes, sizes and colours as there are over .1800
species of them.
For protection, starfish have leathery skin and sometimes long sharp spines. They also have radial
symmetry, meaning a regular arrangement of body parts around a central axis. Although, most
commonly, starfish have five arms, there are species with up to forty, and each arm has at its tip
an eye spot which can detect light and dark. The starfish also has the ability to regenerate lost arms,
though the process takes approximately a year.
Another interesting, if somewhat off-putting ,fact about the starfish is its method of feeding. It takes
hold of its prey (often clams, mussels or small fish), slides its stomach out of its mouth, digests its
prey outside the body, then slides its stomach back in.

The Gym
My doctor had been badgering me about getting more exercise for several years. Of course, I knew he
was right. Over the years, the various sports I'd played in my youth had fallen by the waysideI was
no longer able to find the time for them.
That left the gym. I'd been mulling it over for about six months, but every time I looked through my
local gym's window, I was convinced it was a terrible idea. There were the competitive, exhibitionist
types, grunting and sweating. Then there were the trainers insisting that you rigidly adhere to a
schedule of mind-numbingly monotonous activities such as running on a treadmill like a hamster
on its wheel. And all of this was carried out in front of huge picture windows in full view of any
passers-by! Nothing about it was the least bit appealing.
And yet, when I finally joined the gym, I was pleasantly surprised. With careful planning, the
grunters can be avoided, and I'm even becoming quite fond · of my trainer.

A Ghost Story
Charlie Bates, my great-great-grandfather, once claimed to have seen a ghost. Two ghosts, actually.
And this despite his being a very level~headed, practical man by all accounts .
It all happened back in 1918. Charlie was making his weary way home, on foot, after three years
spent fighting in the First World War. On arriving at his parents' cottage, he expressed his
amazement that Daisy and Florence Boothroyd, nonagenarian sisters, were still alive and well.
Charlie's puzzled mother told him that in fact they'd both passed away a year earlier. In spite of this,
Charlie insisted that he'd seen the two "old misers" as the sisters were known locally, sitting under
an ancient oak tree.
The next day the Qak tree was struck by lightning and uprooted. Underneath was a huge sack of
gold coins. Charlie always maintained that the sisters' ghosts had been watching over their precious
hoard. His mother, however , would mutter about the effects of shell shock and the horrors of war on
sensitive young soldiers whenever Charlie brought the subject up.

Satellite Meteorology
Satellite technology has revolutionised the field of meteorology. The 1960 launch of the first
television and observation satellite heralded the beginning of a completely different approach, not
only to forecasting the weather, but also to looking at climatic and environmental phenomena.
The main problem with conventional methods of observation was that they could not monitor weather
patterns over the world's oceans. It is above these oceans, which comprise roughly 75% of the surface
of the planet, where the most severe storms begin. Consequently , scientists were unable to provide advance
warning of impending storms. Nowadays, however, meteorologists can keep tabs on hurricanes
and typhoons that are still far out at sea.
Satellites are also fitted out with instruments that can collect a huge quantity of data related to
the changes that the Earth's climate is undergoing. Conservationists hope that they will be able to
use this evidence to increase awareness of environmental issues and to prevail upon decision-makers
to pay more attention to the far-reaching influence of human activities on the natural world.

Bollywood
To us in the West, Hollywood may seem like the centre of the cinematic world, but it is actually India
which boasts the biggest film-making industry on the planet. A large part of this industry is based
in Mumbai, and is dubbed 'Bollywood' -a combination of the words 'Bombay' {the former name of
Mumbai) and 'Hollywood'.
India produces all sorts of different films, but the ones that really bring the house down there are
the so-called Bollywood blockbusters. These tend to follow a fairly standard pattern and include
high drama, plenty of romance, comedy, tears and violent outbursts of passion, always in beautiful,
colourful surroundings. Singing and dancing are musts - even in Bollywood war films, soldiers are
likely to break.into song before and even during battle scenes.
In recent years, the popularity ofBollywood films has spread beyond India's borders and there is now
an audience for these spectacular movies in all corners of the world.

Body Language
Words may be the most obvious part of any conversation, but they are only the tip of the
communication iceberg. Studies have shown that body language, or non-verbal communication, has
an enormous impact on our perception of others.
Is the person you are talking to leaning in or are they edging away from you? Is their head tilted?
. Are their hands in their pockets? Do they keep breaking eye contact ? Even if you are not aware of it,
all of these things are likely to contribute to your opinion of the person and of what they are telling you.
The meaning of particular gestures can vary greatly from one culture to another. Having (6) ~ __
that, the importance of non-verbal communication seems to be universal. Indeed, all around the
globe, in cases where words and body language conflict , people seem to give just as much credence to
the non-verbal message that they are picking up on as they do to the speaker's words.

Meeting Marvin Gaye
When I first met Marvin Gaye in his Sunset Strip studio, I had just finished a two-year project
co-writing the autobiography of Ray Charles, an inspiring collaborator, but an authoritative and often
distant figure. Marvin came on like a brother. He was warm, witty and quick to laugh.
He spoke like he sang, in whisper-quiet melodies and soft falsettos. His conversation had a lyricism all of
its own His affectations - a slight British accent when he was feeling aristocratic, for example
- were more than made up for by his disarming sincerity. We became friends. I felt privileged .
to watch him work and play up-close. It soon became clear that, like his music, his personal life was
filled with dramatic contradictions, a combination of charm and chaos. Because he was a
hero of mine, and because his art was so dazzlingly beautiful - so self-contained, so accomplished, so
utterly slick - it took me a while to realise my hero was drowning.

A Message for Lisa
It was nearly two weeks later that Lisa arrived at college to find there was a message for her. The voice
teacher, Pete, said she'd have to go up to the head office to collect it. Lisa wanted to know what
was in the message and who it was from, but the voice teacher insisted it was confidential 'Can't you
just tell me?' Lisa pleaded , but Pete jutted his chin and said he was only obeying the rules.
Lisa stretched her eyes at him. She had been brought up to be wary of anyone who believed in
rules.
The head office was on the third floor. Lisa's fantasies grew with each turn of the stairs. Each flap of
swing door brought sweeter and sweeter thoughts of her and Quentin's reconciliation.
It occurred to her only a second before she slid through into the dusty light of the office that
Quentin had no way of knowing that she was at college, and even if he did, it was unlikely he
would know which college she was at. 'Lisa.' The head of department was talking to her. 'Someone has
been looking for you.' Lisa's change of heart was so severe it took her breath away.

Horses·
Of the more than 4,000 species of mammals that have inhabited our earth over the past 10,000 years,
the horse is one of fewer than a dozen which have been successfully domesticated. Domestication is not
simply a matter of human intention. If it were, it is possible that we would now be sitting in our
fireside chairs with a hyena curled at our feet.
Much of what we take for granted as useful in the modern horse - speed, size and intelligence,
for example - can be explained through the evolutionary changes it has undergone in response to a
changing diet. As the Ice Age advanced and forests died away, to be replaced by windswept
savannah, many herbivores were compelled to change their diets from leaves to grass. The little
leaf-browsing predecessor of our modern horse - the ur-horse - began to change and adapt to a
new ecological niche on the plains. The head grew longer, with the eye positioned at some
distance from the mouth, so that in exposed spaces it could keep a careful lookout for
predators while it grazed. A larger brain began to develop, probably because, as a grazer, it needed
greater tactile sensitivity in its lips to choose its food.

The Rejected Novel
'You've not had much luck with the book, I hear.'
That had to be the understatement of the year. My novel had been rejected four times thus far.
I've no doubt that behind my back the family were having a good snigger. Rhona of course had
been the loyal exception , though I admit that her piteous expressions when the thing limped home
battered by franking stamps were harder to bear than her sister's outright sarcasm: 'Has your
boomerang got back yet, Patton?' she'd enquire, while her husband Jack would give the knife an extra
twist by asking if I'd managed to sell any of my daubs. Which meant that he presumed I'd packed in .
my job on the railways to pursue a painting career. Maybe I should have. The manuscript had begun to
show bruises from its days, weeks and months buried in the 'slush pile' of various publishing
firms. Actual criticism of the novel by its rejectors was very thin on the ground, although the
consensus of opinion seemed to indicate that its main weakness lay in its apparent 'lack of
plot'.

Reading People
Last month I ,vas invited to lunch with my cousin
and his new wife. I hadn't met her befo re, but my
cousin had been raving to everyone about
her wonderful, warm and caring personality. Clea rly
she had completely swept him off his feet. It
didn't take long for me to see through this veneer.
On arriving at lunch, she sat down at the table
without so  much as an acknowledgment
of my presence. She proceeded to continue her
conversation with her husband as if I didn't exist,
and then glared at the young waitress for
accidentally spilling some water on the table. T was
eventually deemed worthy of her attention
only when it came to paying the bill; I had offered
to treat them to lunch to celebrate their recent 'good
news'. She was evidently someone who could turn
the charm on, but only when it served her
purpose. In my opinion, truly wonderful,
warm and caring people do not blow hot and cold in
their behaviour to others depending on what they
be! ieve they can get out of them.of what someone
can do for them.

Travel Books of the Year
The best travel books of this year fall
into three main categories; purely informational,
narrative, and what, for want of a better
t erm, I'll cal l 'anecdotal'. Between these broad
categories, however, the boundaries are
blurred One problem with putting travel
writers into genres is that they are loath to
be pigeon -holed. Many of them see their role as a
mixture of the documentary and the creative.
Some claim to be more like novelists,
employing some of the elements of fiction
writing. Others regard themselves as sociologists,
exploring the customs and mores of other
societies. At the end of the day, what counts
is how readable or useful the book is, and in many
cases, how well it is presented. However, it is quite
clear that travel and books were made for
each other.

The Journey
The car had again failed to start, and Elizabeth was
again compelled to take the train. She brought a
cup of coffee down the rocking carriage, wincing
as the boiling fluid seeped out from under the lid and
on to her hand. The heating was turned up
full and most of the people in the carriage
seemed on the verge of unconsciousness as
they looked out of the window at the flatlands sliding
past the window. Elizabeth had telephoned
the matron of the home, who told her that Brennan was
barely worth visiting, but that he would see her if she
came. She felt excited by the prospect of actually
meeting someone from that era. She would be like a
historian who, after working from other histories, finally
lays hands on original source material. She
had an unclear pictureof Brennan in her mind,
although she knew he would be old and, judging
from what the matron had said, decrepit.

Marketing Movies
Hyping, or to do it more politely, marketing
movies can double their budget. And in the end, does
it really do the trick? Those without the
major studios' huge spending power are not
convinced. 'There will always be an audience that
follows the big campaigns,' says Andrea Klein, of
the British Film Institute, 'but there is another which
doesn't respond to four-page colour ads.' For
this audience, reviews are all-important. Publicist
Jonathan Rutter concurs: 'Most of our films can be
killed stone dead by bad reviews,' he says.
Although he is not averse to the odd
gimmick, he warns against too much hype: 'I get put
off films which are over-marketed,' he says. 'People
don't like to be spoon-fed, they prefer to make up
their own minds.' For Hollywood blockbusters,
leaving people to make up their own minds
is not a viable marketing strategy. Films on this
scale are caught up in a vicious circle. To
recover inflated production costs a mass
audience must be found, and to find that audience
takes a giant publicity budget.

Pregnancy - a time to forget
Anecdotal reports that that heavily pregnant women and new mothers forgetful have been backed up by a
study that has found that the ability to memorise information drops significantly in the last three months
of pregnancy.
The findings of the study were reported yesterday to the Society for Neuroscience annual meeting in
New Orleans by Dr Pamela Keenan, assistant professor of psychiatry at Wayne State University and
Detroit Medical Centre.
In a study into the "benign encephalopathy of pregnancy", Dr Keenan carried out memory tests on 19
pregnant women and found that the ability to recall information declined during pregnancy. Expressed
in terms of the amount of information that could be remembered, it declined from 49 percent in the
first trimester, to 47 percent in the second, to 39 percent in the third. Shortly, after birth the study partici-
pants were able to recall 37 percent of the information.
It was noted that after a period of approximately three months, the studied revealed that new mums'
memories return to a relative state of normality. Other studies have since been carried out on more
subjects revealing more concrete evidence that pregnancy does indeed contribute to memory-loss. But, then
again, there are also health benefits to life with a bun in the oven.

The Sinking of the Titanic
All in all of the Titanic had received six ice warnings; it was quite clear that the Titanic was steaming
towards ice. At 11:40 pm many of the stewards were turning down the lights and cleaning the Titanic's
public rooms, and the last of the social gatherings were making their way to their cabins. In the crow's nest,
Frederick Fleet and Reginald Lee struggled to make out what was in the haze - for some odd
reason, binoculars were not in the nest. Suddenly Fleet jerked the warning bell three times and
telephoned the bridge and sputtered, "Iceberg dead ahead" into the receiver. "Thank you", Sixth
Officer Moody replied. The Titanic was a collision course with a huge iceberg and the officers in
the crow's nest braced themselves for impact. The worst part is what happened to the people
onboard. The ship was one of the most luxurious liners of all time, but it wasn't fitted with enough
lifeboats for all the passengers, so many died that night and in the early hours of the following morning.

Brain Gel
A gel that helps brains recover from injected injuries has been developed by scientists at the Clemson
University in South Carolina. The gel, which is stimulates in liquid form at the site where the injury was
sustained, notoriously stem cell growth in the affected area. In terms of circumstances in which it might be
applied, the gel has the potential to treat a wide range of head injuries, including those arising from car
accidents, falls and gunshot wounds.
Serious brain injuries are particularly difficult to recover from on account of the fact that the affected tissue
can swell up considerably, which causes additional collateral damage to the surrounding cells. Existing treat-
ments do little more than attempt to limit secondary damage and are relatively ineffective certainly when it
comes to repairing the damaged cells, so the discovery of a gel which stimulates cell repair is being
heralded as revolutionary.
Despite the wave of excitement now running through medical circles, it is important to note that results
so far are based solely on observations of the effects of the gel on laboratory rats. The development of
the treatment is very much still in its preliminary stages and human testing is expected to be some three
years or more away yet.