Vancouver
In the last ten years or so, hundreds of thousands of people from all over the world have
(1) .... up residence in Vancouver, in western Canada. To relax in the evening, residents
(2) .... down the city streets and, if you join them, you are likely to overhear a different language at
almost every other step. People come to Vancouver for its mild climate, its wonderful setting
between the ocean and the mountains, its clean and safe environment and its educational and job
opportunities. And (3) .... some may grumble about the speed at which new buildings have (4) .... ,
there's no doubt that the new arrivals and (5) .... tourism industry have helped fuel an urban
renaissance. Locals once referred to Vancouver as 'Terminal City' because of the city's role as a
terminus or gateway to all other places. Though the name has fallen slightly out of (6) .... ,
Vancouver is more a gateway than ever.
1 A taken B put C made D built
2 A prowl B stumble C trudge D stroll
3 A conversely B nevertheless C much as D even so
4 A sprung up B gathered up C piled up D moved up
5 A progressing B blooming C flourishing D swelling
6 A approval B favour C opinion D support
Putting Pen to Paper
Journalists like myself are usually poor letter-writers. I have heard it (7) .... that this is because of
the instinctive distaste we feel at writing something we are not going to be paid for, but I cannot
believe we have quite such mercenary characters. It is more probably that (8) .... in our work, we
are always (9) .... to get the greatest possible effect, the essential spontaneity of a letter (10) ....
us. The real creative artist, who does not consciously work on the effect at all (though he may rewrite
a passage dozens of times), does not have this problem. I believe that it is in this inherent
grasp of the effect of his words that there (11) .... the only sure test of the real artist. When
Shakespeare wrote some of his famous lines he (12) .... never thought consciously that it was the
contrast between polysyllables that made them so effective, as well as showing him to be a great
writer.
7 A said B told C remarked D presumed
8 A since B for C like D once
9 A striving B exerting C contending D tackling
10 A misses B escapes C avoids D passes
11 A goes B remains C lies D exists
12 A inevitably B confidently C particularly D surely
Supermarket Opening
The opening of a new supermarket used to be a bit of an event in Britain. You could always rely
on a soap star, a disc jockey or a minor member of the royal family to come down and cut the
ribbon. Now it seems that new branches are (13) .... up every day in many areas and so the poor
old celebrity has become (14) ..... Why pay a famous person when any Tom, Dick or Harry will
open it for nothing? Last week, waiting pensioners didn't care who opened the new branch of
Superbuy, (15) .... they were at the front. According to one prospective customer who knew
someone who worked there, the first five men over the (16) .... would be getting a bottle of
aftershave, and the first five women, a bunch of flowers. This (17) .... of information quickly swept
(18) .... the crowd, instilling feelings of smug superiority among those at the front, and envy from
the latecomers.
13 A popping B leaping C jumping D nipping
14 A superfluous B excessive C surplus D residual
15 A despite B so long as C in case D regardless
16 A entrance B doorway C threshold D barrier
17 A clipping B strand C string D snippet
18 A among B through C across D around

****

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)
1 A 2 D 3 C 4 A 5 C 6 B 7 A 8 A 9 A
10 B 11 C 12 D 13 A 14 A 15 B 16 C
17 D 18 B

----

Language
You and I belong to a species with a remarkable ability; we can shape events in each other's brains
with exquisite precision. Language is so (1) .... woven into human experience that it is scarcely
possible to imagine life without it. (2) .... are that if you find two or more people together anywhere
on earth, they will soon be (3) .... words. When there is no one to talk with, people talk to
themselves, to their dogs, even to their plants. I like to describe the skill of language as an 'instinct'.
This (4) .... the idea that people know how to talk in more or less the sense that spiders know how
to spin webs. Web-spinning was not invented by some unsung spider genius, and does not (5) ....
having had the right education or on having an (6) .... for architecture or the construction trades.
1 A rigidly B tightly C stiffly D tautly
2 A Chances B Probabilities C Reasons D Explanations
3 A sharing B reciprocating C exchanging D trading
4 A transmits B disseminates C transfers D conveys
5 A build on B depend on C count on D bank on
6 A aptitude B applicability C intuition D intelligence
Climate and Weather
Climate and weather, which are mainly created by the air around us, profoundly affect the lives
and distribution of animals and plants. Climate can be a dominating force on the character of
landscapes. For example, warmth and wetness all the year round allow the growth of tropical
jungles, which are natural (7) .... troves, with an incredible diversity of species. (8) .... cold,
windswept areas can muster only a scattered selection of living things. The daily weather patterns
that (9) .... up in the long term to the climate are caused by great masses of air rising and mixing,
for the atmosphere is never still. Some of the motion is (10) .... the fact that the envelope of gases
rests on a spinning globe; because air is thin it is not dragged along at the same speed as the
earth, but tends to (11) .... behind. A more important (12) .... of turbulence, or air movement,
however, is the sun.
7 A prize B treasure C fortune D trophy
8 A Subsequently B Conversely C Simultaneously D Eventually
9 A make B join C add D load
10 A along with B apart from C due to D given that
11 A lag B stray C delay D linger
12 A root B spring C font D source
Coffee
My duties as bar-person included serving drinks but, more worryingly, I was to be responsible for
making coffee. In Lygon Street, Melbourne, a restaurant can stand or fall on its coffee reputation.
There followed several days of intensive coffee-making training, in which I (13) .... more than I could
ever wish to know about the cleaning and (14) .... of the restaurant's gleaming espresso machine.
I learnt, too, about the essential principles (15) .... in making the perfect cup of rich, frothy cappuccino.
By the end of the first week I had to admit that making a decent cup of coffee was not as easy as
it looked and I (16) .... expected to be (17) .... to lowly ash-tray wiping duties again. Luckily, my
boss was a patient man. 'Making coffee is both an art and a science,' he said, 'and you need time
to (18) : ... the knack.'
13 A took in B carried off C pulled through D looked up
14 A catering B service C preservation D maintenance
15 A concerned B involved C needed D established
16 A fully B wholly C mainly D nearly
17 A banished B deported C punished D ordered
18 A achieve B attain C activate D acquire

****

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)
1 B 2 A 3 C 4 D 5 B 6 A 7 B 8 B 9 C 
10 C 11 A 12 D 13 A 14 D 15 B 16 A
17 A 18 D

----

Othello
The transfer to London from Stratford of an exceptional production of Shakespeare's play Othello
allows me to make (1) .... for an unfair review that I wrote when the show opened last spring. Back
then I complained that Ray Fearon was too young to play the title role and I was guilty of running
down his acting. I still think it's a distortion of the tragedy to remove the age difference between
Othello and Desdemona but I eat my (2) .... about the rest of Mr Fearon's magnificent performance.
Indeed the whole cast is magnificent. Memorable scenes include the one where Cassio's
competitive games with the other young officers get dangerously out of (3) .... , and the moment
when Iago begins to lose control and has to struggle to get a (4) .... on himself. And I challenge
anyone not to be (5) .... to tears during the scene where Emilia prepares Desdemona for bed. The
(6) .... and tension throughout are terrific. Do not miss this production.
1 A confessions B amends C compensation D recourse
2 A thoughts B words C ideas D comments
3 A turn B place C reach D hand
4 A brake B grasp C rein D grip
5 A drawn B sent C moved D carried
6 A pace B dash C rate D haste
Lake Vostok •
In the heart of Antarctica, nothing (7) ..... On the fringes of the continent there are penguins, seals
and birds aplenty. But up on the great white plateau in the interior, life has no foothold. Except,
(8) .... , in a vast hidden expanse of freshwater named Lake Vostok which lies beneath nearly
4 kilometres of ice, directly below the coldest (9) .... on earth. The water has been isolated from air
and sunlight for up to 25 million years. Biologists can hardly wait to (1 0) .... its mysterious depths
and discover what strange organisms lurk within. G~ologists and glaciologists are hot on their
(11) ..... For two years now, researchers round the world have been plotting ways to uncover the
lake's secrets, and, if they get their wish, in the next few years we will (12) .... the decade of Lake
Vostok.
7 A stalks B stirs C suits D sounds
8 A that is B for example C in effect D as such
9 A tip B speck C spot D dot
10 A burrow B plunge C tunnel D probe
11 A heels B knees C paces D steps
12 A present B witness C expose D reveal
Scientists
There was an interesting thing on the radio last week. It seems that a bunch of scientists are getting
themselves hot under the (13) .... over what drives them to be scientists; the expression 'because
it's there' (14) .... to mind. Sure we all know it's the age-old (15) .... for knowledge, the desire to
understand everything from the atom to the black hole. But what these guys want to know is why
we want to know all of this in the first (16) .... and why can't science explain why we want to know?
Surely, it's more important to know whether what we scientists are doing is right, rather than get
(17) .... in debates over the point of it all. I would have thought that the crucial issue here is not
why we pursue it, but to (18) .... that science is a tool, and we are the ones who should decide
how, where, when and why to use it.
13 A shirt B collar C cuff D hat
14 A trips B bounds C springs D slips
15 A mission B quest C journey D expedition
16 A place B stage C step D part
17 A pulled up B dragged up C slowed down D bogged down
18 A identify B accommodate C distinguish D recognise

****

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)
1 B 2 B 3 D 4 D 5 C 6 A 7 B 8 A 9 C
10 D 11 A 12 B 13 B 14 C 15 B 16 A
17 D 18 D

----

Clutter
Sometimes it seems that no matter how many possessions you have, you never feel secure. While
it is reasonable to have a basic nesting instinct and create a home which (1) .... your needs, there
is a point where the motivation for acquiring things gets out of control. Modern advertising is
(2) .... deliberately designed to play on our insecurities. 'If you don't have one of these you will be
a (3) .... human being' is one of the consistent (4) .... messages we receive. To discover just how
much you are influenced, I challenge you to try not to read any advertising billboards next time you
go down the street. These multi-million dollar messages (5) .... condition us in very persuasive ways
without our ever realising it. We are bombarded by them - television, radio, newspapers,
magazines, posters, tee shirts, the internet, you (6) .... it - all encouraging us to buy, buy, buy.
1 A quenches B stays C meets D feeds
2 A nonetheless B moreover C thereby D whatever
3 A minor B lesser C deeper D lower
4 A subdued B submerged C underlying D underhand
5 A relentlessly B fiercely C thoroughly D extremely
6 A label B tell C say D name
Caves
Research establishments and university departments around the world have (7) .... years of
research time in all aspects of caves, mainly their origins, their hydrology and their biology. Caves
constitute a small but rather mysterious (8) .... of the natural environment - as such they (9) .... our
curiosity and challenge our desire for knowledge, and consequently have had a considerable
amount of research effort (10) .... to them. Furthermore, because of their presence as natural
phenomena, they have had a long history of study, which has been intensified in those parts of the
world where caves have had a direct effect on our way of life. However, the physical (11) ....
required to visit many caves means that cave research has been less in the hands of the learned
professors than in most other scientific fields. Indeed there is a considerable, perhaps unique,
(12) .... between the professional, scientific study of caves and the amateur studies carried out by
those who mainly visit caves for sport.
7 A conducted B done C invested D made
8 A constituent B compartment C complement D component
9 A arouse B incite C tempt D instigate
10 A donated B bestowed C devoted D lavished
11 A agility B capacity C properties D demands
12 A underlay B overlap C stratification D dependence
Weather Watch
Countless observant people without any instruments other than their own senses originally (13) ....
the foundations of meteorology, which has progressed since the 1 ih century into the highly
technical science of today. Satellites and electronic instruments (14) .... endless weather
information to us with the minimum of delay, computers solve in minutes abstruse mathematical
sums at a speed beyond the capability of the human brain. Meteorological theory is peppered with
long words which have little (15) .... to the non-professional. It sometimes seems there is no room
left for simple weather wisdom, but nothing could be further from the (16) ..... Human experience
is still the vital ingredient which (17) .... computed data into weather forecasts. Human observations
can still provide unusual evidence which is of great help to professionals who are trying to (18) ....
the mysteries of the atmosphere.
13 A spread B made C put D laid
14 A relay B diffuse C share D deal
15 A purpose B validity C meaning D message
16 A trust B honesty C truth D wisdom
17 A transports B translates C transcends D transposes
18 A untie B undo C unwrap D unravel

****

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)
1 C 2 B 3 B 4 C 5 A 6 D 7 C 8 D 9 A
10 C 11 A 12 B 13 D 14 A 15 C 16 C
17 B 18 D

----

Air-conditioning
There is a chill in the air at Cannons Gym, a favourite lunch-time haunt for City of London workers.
To deal with this summer's unusually high temperatures, the fitness centre has
gone (1) .... with the air-conditioning. (2) .... , in fact, that at quiet times, the gym feels like
somewhere in the Arctic. This is just one example of how the modern world casually (3) .... airconditioning.
It has become a central feature of work and play, a potent (4) .... of the ability of
humanity to control the climate, or at least modify it.
Many air-conditioned buildings, however, could (5) .... other methods of cooling. They could take
advantage of daylight and natural ventilation and have thicker walls that absorb less heat during
the day and radiate it away at night. These (6) .... may sound obvious, but they can have telling
results and would considerably reduce the need for air-conditioning.
1 A overweight B overboard C overtime D overblown
2 A So much so B So as to C So to speak D So be it
3 A malfunctions B outdoes C superimposes D misuses
4 A symbol B token C emblem D label
5 A empower B engage C employ D enlist
6 A outcomes B measures C resolutions D actions
Sundials
It is surely more than coincidence that the beginning of a new millennium is being (7) .... by renewed
interest in sundials: instruments used to measure time according to the position of the sun. A
hundred years ago, they were a vital time-keeping (8) .... , essential for anyone who hoped to keep
their clocks working accurately. Then, as clocks and watches became more sophisticated and
reliable, the sundial was relegated to the (9) .... of garden ornament - a romantic and intriguing
ornament, but (10) .... an anachronism, in a brave new technological age. Now the clock has been
turned back and they are again being taken seriously.
David Harber, a sundial maker, believes that their appeal (11) .... in their direct link with the planets.
He says that when he delivers one, there is a (12) .... of magic when it starts working. They are
still, calm, romantic objects that remind us of our place in the cosmos.
7 A associated B accompanied C acquainted D aroused
8 A device B utensil C piece D item
9 A cluster B set C group D status
10 A conversely B after all C nonetheless D in turn
11 A stands B displays C evolves D lies
12 A moment B point C time D pause
Paint Your Own China
My image of china-painting (13) .... from a visit, long ago, to an arts and crafts exhibition where
stern-looking grey-haired ladies demonstrated how to cover a teacup with delicate flowers using a
(14) .... of deft brushstrokes. The spectacle was (15) .... , because each stroke formed a perfect
petal or leaf. Their hands never wobbled, the paint never smudged, and the observer might have
concluded that these women had either been (16) .... their art for decades or had been born with
an extraordinary talent for steady precision.
(17) .... of this experience, I wondered what kind of people would have the courage to enrol on a
course in china-painting. Would even the beginners display an (18) .... artistry? In fact, the
atmosphere turned out to be far from intimidating. The students were all there to have tun and not
even the tutor wanted to paint petals on teacups with the robotic rapidity I had remembered.
13 A stemmed B initiated C commenced D instigated
14 A string B collection C series D procession
15 A sensitive B riveting C charismatic D distinctive
16 A practising B exercising C working D expressing
17 A In respect B Careful C On reflection D Mindful
18 A intuitive B inward C inverted D integral

****

1 B 2 A 3 D 4 A 5 C 6 B 7 B 8 A 9 D
10 C11 D 12 A 13 A 14 C 15 B 16 A
17 D 18 A

----

Sand
Much as I admire sand's miraculous ability to be transformed into useful objects like glass and
concrete, I am not a great fan of it in its (1) .... state.To me it is primarily a hostile barrier that stands
between a seaside car park and the water itself. It blows in your face, (2) .... in your sandwiches,
and swallows vital objects like car keys and coins. When you are wet it (3) .... to you like 'stucco',
and cannot be (4) .... , even with a fireman's hose. But, and here's the strange thing, the moment
you step onto a beach towel, climb into a car or walk across a recently vacuumed carpet, it pours
off you. For days afterwards, you tip mysteriously undiminishing piles of it onto the floor every time
you take off your shoes, and spray the vicinity with lots more when you (5) .... your socks. Sand
stays with you for longer than many contagious diseases. No, you can (6) .... sand, as far as I am
concerned.
1 A normal B natural C unrefined D unmixed
2 A enters B seeps C gets D comes
3 A adheres B attracts C fixes D grips
4 A shorn B scraped C shoved D shifted
5 A peel off B roll away C move off D strip away
6 A have B keep C hold D store
Lock and Key
The search for a safe home, for privacy and security, has existed ever since human beings first
built a permanent homestead. The rope-lifted beam behind the door may have (7) .... to an
electronic lock triggered by a plastic card with more combinations than there are atoms in the
universe, but the (8) .... to shut out the 'bad guys' remains. The appeal of a lock and key is, to
some (9) .... , psychological. Recently, various companies have experimented with computerised
locking systems, where smart cards, swiped through a 'reader', control electronic locks by means
of a digital (10) ..... But people don't like them. You may be (11) .... to put up with it at work, but at
home, everyone wants the (12) .... of turning a physical key in a lock. As a result, when one
locksmith company developed a new electronic system, they made sure they incorporated a proper
metal key into the device.
7 A taken on B given way C handed down D passed over
8 A force B craving C shove D urge
9 A extent B rate C measure D scale
10 A directive B command C rule D manipulation
11 A agreeable B liable C prepared D geared
12 A reassurance B guarantee C endorsement D confirmation
Modern Art
I was nervous about visiting the new Tate Modern gallery as, like many people, I can make head
nor (13) .... of modern art. I know I quite like some of it, furry things in particular, neon light
sculptures and massive photographs. Perhaps if I were better informed about it, I'd have an opinion
on more things. There again, you're not meant to (14) .... about it in a school-essay way. The point
is not to grasp art, but to let it communicate with you. This is a splendid idea but one that never
worked for me in (15) ..... But this new gallery has tried to give the visitor a genuine insight into
the whys and wherefores of the works. The first thing I noticed were the labels, proper labels that
set a work in (16) .... and actually told you what it was trying to say. Instead of staring (17) .... at
the pictures as I used to, these (18) .... of information helped me understand.
13 A foot B tail C heart D heel
14 A set B look C start D put
15 A honesty B purpose C practice D action
16 A context B place C contrast D situation
17 A barely B clearly C blankly D plainly
18 A nuggets B abstracts C extracts D cuttings

****

1 B 2 C 3 A 4 D 5 A 6 B 7 B 8 D 9 A
10 B11 C 12 A 13 B 14 A 15 C 16 A
17 C 18 A

----

Metals
It may have been a wish for self-adornment that (1) .... the interest of Stone Age people in metals.
Sitting by the side of a river, waiting for a fish to come within a spear's throw, or just
(2) .... away a moment, one of our early ancestors might have happened upon a shiny yellow pebble
and plucked it off the river (3) ..... It did not have the feel of stone, but it was attractive. In such a
way, one could (4) .... that gold entered the lives of primitive people.
(5) .... the malleability of the metal, it very soon became a much sought-after material. Copper may
also have been discovered by accident, and once the value of copper tools was realised, the search
for its ores and for ways of getting the copper out of them was (6) .... with vigour. Thus,
metalworking was added to our ancestors' battery of life-enhancing accomplishments.
1 A aroused B enlivened C cultivated D incited
2 A passing B idling C occupying D employing
3 A track B bed C floor D path
4 A conjecture B disclose C fabricate D prophesy
5 A Providing B Thanks C Given D Resulting
6 A raced B chased C tracked D pursued
St Ives
There was silence as we (7) .... our bags down the winding, cobbled lane that led to the heart of
town, {8) .... double against the force eight gale and trying in vain to avoid the icy waves that
(9) .... over the promenade. There was no one on the streets and the shutters in every cottage on
the waterfront were bolted tight against the battering. We had watched the weather worsen as we
chugged into St Ives on the tiny single-track railway. As the ominous grey skies (10) .... in, visiting
Cornwall in the off-season - without a car - no longer seemed such a good idea. I had (11) .... my
friend into joining me with the (12) .... of walks along the beautiful Cornish coast, and snug evenings,
toasting ourselves before open fires.
7 A lugged B clambered C grabbed D lumbered
8 A leant B bent C sloped D borne
9 A smashed B engulfed C splattered D erupted
10 A folded B came C closed D blew
11 A drawn B lured C trapped D led
12 A provision B project C proposal D promise
Computer Modelling
The problem with studying the past is that it is past. The people who (13) .... in times of peace and
plenty and struggled through conflict and drought are long dead. The forces that (14) .... them to
settle here or move there, that brought them together as families and clans, villages and cities,
have (15) .... from memory. Archaeology provides {16) .... and clues, but we cannot test our
hypotheses with experiments on cultures living or dead. We cannot rewind the tape and watch a
replay of the past. Then again, perhaps we can.
Computer modelling allows us to recreate prehistoric landscapes and environments and (17) ....
them with virtual communities - digital creations with some of the needs, independence and
capabilities of real-world humans. We can establish (18) .... of conduct and replicate social units.
Then we can turn down the rainfall - or turn up the population - and watch how this cyber-culture
and its artificial people react.
13 A endured B enriched C prevailed D prospered
14 A sought B made C drove D chose
15 A dissolved B faded C lapsed D slipped
16 A hints B tips C prompts D cribs
11 A fulfil B inhabit C populate D settle
18 A etiquette B ways C manners D rules

****

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)
l A 2 B 3 B 4 A 5 C 6 D 7 A 8 B 9 A
10 C 11 B 12 D 13 D 14 C 15 B 16 A
17 C 18 D

----

Surviving in a Foreign land 
I have been welcomed warmly. It's a sociable and well-provisioned base camp in a very, very
isolated place. At any one time, there are some forty odd souls - scientists, students, weathermen,
satellite trackers - in a (1) .... community where everyone mucks (2) ., ... My school French is
proving adequate - just - to (3) .... , but not to chat or banter. I miss the nuances, and my
phrasebook is useless at breakfast.
There is no practical problem for me in this, but initially there was a problem of self-confidence. I
found myself slightly dreading mealtimes. I would (4) .... , worried about which table to choose,
terrified at the silence which (5) .... when I spoke, anxious in a way I cannot remember since the
first weeks of school. I still grin inanely, or panic when people talk to me. I suspect the cause of
this occasional depression is nothing to do with loss of company or communication; it's because
I've lost the social predominance which my own gift of the gab has always (6) .... me.
1 A close-knit B close-fitting C close-run D close-cropped
2 A about B around C in D up
3 A articulate B communicate C converse D interpret
4 A bend back B turn back C lean back D hang back
5 A dropped B fell C hit D struck
6 A afforded B empowered C entitled D presented
Elliot
When I first met Elliot, I was just a young author like any other and he took no notice of me. He
never forgot a face though, and when I (7) .... him here or there he shook hands with me cordially,
but showed no desire to (8) .... our acquaintance; and if I saw him at the opera, say, he being with
a person of high rank, he was (9) .... not to catch sight of me. But then I (10) .... to make a somewhat
startling success as a playwright, and presently I became aware that Elliot (11) .... me with a warmer
feeling. One day, I received a note from him asking me to lunch and I conceived the (12) .... that
he was trying me out. But from then on, since my success had brought me many new friends, I
began to see him more frequently.
7 A ran across B fell in with C saw through D took up with
8 A accelerate B advance C further D promote
9 A inclined B inspired C vulnerable D susceptible
10 A developed B happened C transpired D grew
11 A held B observed C took D regarded
12 A impression B suspicion C notion D opinion
Alfred Hitchcock
The film director Alfred Hitchcock always insisted that he didn't care about the (13) .... matter
of his films, or (14) .... about the acting, but that he did care about the photography and the
soundtrack and all the technical ingredients. For Hitchcock, it wasn't a message that (15) .... the
audience, nor was it a great performance; he believed that people are aroused by pure film,
(16) .... of their cultural background. Therefore, if a picture is designed correctly, in terms of its
emotional (17) .... , the Japanese audience should scream at the same moment as the Indian
audience.
Hitchcock's self-appraisal was always precise, rational, deceptively unanswerable; he was a man
of reason and a craftsman of genius who liked to hear an audience scream. He didn't deal in
speculation, abstraction or intellectual allusion, and his assessment of his own screen characters
was not exploratory. He set his (18) .... on film, pure film, and the most dispassionate,
mathematically calculable beauty of what a strip of film can be made to do to an audience.
13 A topic B content C subject D theme
14 A whether B indeed C instead D rather
15 A stirred B riled C raised D sparked
16 A unremarked B unrelated C irrelevant D irrespective
17 A involvement B feedback C impact D response
18 A views B targets C aims D sights

****

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)
1 A 2 C 3 B 4 D 5 B 6 A 7 A 8 C 9 A
11 D 12 C 13 C 14 B 15 A 16 D
17 C 18 D

----

Einstein
Stop anyone in the street and ask them to name a scientist, and the chances are they'll think of
Albert Einstein. His face is used to advertise products with intellectual (1) .... , from computers to
encyclopaedias.
Most people know little of what Einstein did, except that he developed some mysterious theories
under the heading 'relativity', which are, f~mous for being incomprehensible, and for coming up with
bizarre predictions that (2) .... counter to everyday experience.
Einstein was part of a gigantic (3) .... forward in scientific thinking, an intellectual revolution that
(4) .... the birth of twentieth century science. Physicists and mathematicians were trying to create a
new, more rational description of the universe by studying relationships between matter and the
forces of nature.
Einstein (5) .. .. his profound and far-reaching contributions simply by looking again at the nature of
the fundamentals: time, space, matter and energy. Previous descriptions had depended on Isaac
Newton's view of a universe in which stars and planets moved in an absolute framework of space
and time. Einste:n (6) .... this notion, saying that time a1Jd space were not absolute but relative.
1 A suppositions B connotations C assumptions D inferences
2 A drive B fall C flow D run
3 A flight B leap C dive D vault
4 A ushered B notified C heralded D declared
5 A gave B laid C offered D made
6 A overthrew B overtook C overwhelmed D overran
Young Readers
Throughout our childhoods, Lydia and I distrusted any prize-winning book because we knew it would
be worthy; and for 'worthy', (7) .... 'boring', we thought.
While our mother had been inclined to abhor our philistinism in tones of despising innuendo, our
father would cheerfully dish us out tenpences, chapter by chapter, as inducements to make us (8) ....
our eyes over the occasional improving volume. Or he would (9) .... the odd superior book in
amongst our Christmas and birthday presents, labelled in bold marker pen, 'This Book is NOT
Literature'. Though we (10) .. .. mast of his offerings as 'boys' books', he did, in this way, (11) / .. us
to some shorter works of decent fiction and, just once, to a well-known (12) .... of verse.
7 A interpret 8 read C consider D define
8 A chuck 8 throw C hurl D cast
9 A link 8 weave C slip D fold
10 A dismissed 8 disqualified C discredited D disclaimed
11 A reveal B expose C unveil D disclose
12 A album B periodical C manual D anthology
Language
'The origin of human language is truly secret and marvellous,' wrote Jacob Grimm in 1851. The
marvellous secret has long proved a launch pad for strange ideas. 'Primitive man was likely to make
sounds like "meuh" when (13) .... danger,' claimed Charles Caller in 1928. "'Meuh" has a plaintive
sound. The human who wandered over a hostile land inhabited by awesome beasts (14) '. 1/.
desperate noises, and languages have preserved some echo of his lamentation such as malaria
meaning "fever" or the Latin mars meaning "death".'
Faced with such weird speculations, many avoided the topic; regarding it as a playground for cranks,
but recently, language origin and evolution have become key research areas. Language probably
developed in East Africa, around 100,000 years ago. (15) .... , speech was used for friendly
interaction, and was an important tool in power (16) .... . Information-swapping was probably not an
important original (17) .... - contrary to the views of philosopher John Locke, who spoke of language
as a 'great conduit' for (18) .. .. knowledge.
13 A feeling B sensing C suffering D fighting
14 A screeched B cried C called D uttered
15 A In conclusion B As a consequence C In the main D Despite this
16 A struggles B wars C strikes D contests
17 A argument B service C role D thought
18 A dispatching 8 conveying C teaching D passing
****
Part 1
1 B 2 D 3 B 4 C 5 D 6 A 7 B 8 D 9 C
10 A 11 B 12 D 13 B 14 D 15 C 16 A 17 C
18 B
----
Paul Simon
Rock and roll in the 1950s was primarily a youth cult, but its lasting importance (1) .... in the seismic
impact it had on the middle class and the middle-aged. It also (2) .... the way for the next generation
of rock idols, who listened to it awestruck and aware that this strange, unsettling sound would
somehow, irrevocably, be (3) .... with their destinies.
For Paul Simon, as for other youngsters in the US, the chief (4) .... for hearing this new and
invigorating type of music that was sweeping the country was courtesy of Alan Freed's radio show,
Moondog Rock 'n' Roll Party. Freed's show was (5) .... listening for a whole generation of fledgling
rock idols. Like the young John Lennon, 3,000 miles away in Liverpool, with his ear (6) .... to Radio
Luxembourg - the only European outlet for the new rock and roll - Paul Simon was fascinated by
the sounds pouring from Freed's show, and prepared himself for the next big step for a rock and roll
obsessed teenager, the switch from listening to others' music to making his own.
1 A stood B stayed C held D lay
2 A paved B fashioned C generated D grounded
3 A fastened B joined C linked- D related
4 A opportunity B chance C way D access
5 A needed B obliged C demanded D required
6 A engrossed B glued C sealed D enthralled
Snow
No path was visible, but I thought that I would be all right if I walked with due caution. The wind
hammered down from the heights, knocking me over as I slid and (7) .. ... on the slippery ice.
Suddenly the innocent-looking snow (8) ..... way beneath me. I dropped, startled, into a hole some
four feet deep. The snow had formed a roof over the gap between two rocks, melting away to leave
nothing but a thin (9) .. .. through which I had plunged. I (10) .... myself out, shaken and unnerved,
wondering what I would have done if the hole had been thirty feet deep. I sat back against the top
of a pine tree that protruded from•the snow to take (11) .... of the situation. In an hour I had covered
about half a mile. It was perfectly clear that I would have to (12) .... my plan.
7 A slithered B swooped C skipped D swept
8 A sank B gave C opened D fell
9 A lining B fabric C crust D cloak
10 A hauled B handed C carted D trailed
11 A issue B thought C stock D gist
12 A abandon B neglect C desist D refute
Qualitative Research
There are now numerous books which attempt to give guidance to researchers about qualitative
research. While much has been written about the collection of data, the books are often (13) .. ..
about the processes and procedures associated with data analysis. Indeed, much mystery
surrounds the way researchers analyse their data. (14) .... , we invited a range of social scientists
who have (15) .... in qualiiative projects to discuss the (16) .... that they used. The idea was to share
insight and understanding of the process of qualitative data analysis rather than to produce a
guidebook for the intending researcher. Such a task involves a process of demystification, of (17) ....
implicit procedures more explicit. While this may sound straightforward, we have found it far from
simple. We have therefore given our contributors the opportunity to (18) .. .. their work in a range of
styles, which include autobiographical narratives and more impersonal forms.
13 A silent B dark C blank D dumb
14 A However B Accordingly C Even so D In essence
15 A employed B engaged C exploited D entered
16 A accounts B manners C approaches D modes
17 A turning B making C putting D getting
18 A propose B render C extend D present
****
Part 1
1 D 2 A 3 C 4 A 5 D 6 B 7 A 8 B 9 C
10 A 11 C 12 A 13 A 14 B 15 B 16 C 17 B
18 D
----
Art on TV
Why is it that television so consistently fails when it (1) .. .. to programmes about the visual arts?
Painting and sculpture should be (2) ... . subjects for the camera, which has the ability to show a
whole work of art, then move in close to examine the details. Yet I can think of few series on television
that have managed to (3) .... both the pleasure and complexity of looking at them.
A good example of what goes wrong can be seen in Robert Hughes's eight part survey of American
art, American Visions. Hughes is a critic you can trust, he has a personality that commands attention
and he has been given nearly eight hours in which to (4) .... British audiences to a school of art that
British galleries have totally ignored. I had expected the series to (5) .... on great works of art. What
I got instead was one about the way American history and culture are (6) .... in its art and
architecture.
1 A applies B takes C addresses D comes
2 A natural B due C right D apparent
3 A convey B inflict C cast Demit
4 A acquaint B disclose C reveal D introduce
5 A target B focus C aim D cover
6 A borne B conferred C reflected D hinted
Dealing in Metals
For 20 years I worked as an international metals dealer and gainecj something of a reputation as a
speculator. Metals are (7) .... far less than other markets. With a bit of luck, a (8) .... to take a risk
and a good understanding of how the market works, it's possible to make a lot of money. Risk-taking
is part and (9) .... of the industry. The buccaneering culture (10) .... nicely with a free-market global
economy. But now the free-trade economists who claimed the market itself would maintain the price
of scarce metals have found the opposite is happening. More minerals are being (11) .... , and the
cost of raw materials is decreasing. Taking inflation into account, the prices of most metals are about
half of what they were 20 years ago. Recently, I was asked to look into (12) .... made against one
of the multinational conglomerates that benefit from these cheap raw materials.
7 A ruled B regulated C governed D legislated
8 A talent s· gift C willingness D propensity
9 A por' tion B package C present D parcel
10 A plays B joins C fits D suits
11 A expelled B extracted C exhumed D expanded
12 A propositions B allegations C suggestions D insinuations
Extract from a Holiday Brochure
Abaco and its off-shore cays are part of the 700 islands of the Bahamas that stretch from Florida,
past the Tropic of Cancer, to Cuba. Each one has its own (13) .... , each one has something to offer.
The key to getting anywhere in the islands and cays of Abaco is a boat. If you don't get one (14) ....
in with the room don't worry. Be happy. There are ferries (15) ..... And water-taxis. Or, there are
plenty of boats to rent if you prefer to go under your own (16) .... .
But sailing is the most popular (17) .... of transport here. Abaco is nicknamed 'The Sailing Capital
of the World' for good reason.
Those calm, naturally protected waters are also a paradise for fishing, diving, snorkelling and
swimming. The cays and their beaches stretch for 200 miles like a (18) _-, .. of pearls. It's not only at
sea that gems can be found. At night it's the lights of the restaurants and cafes of Hope Town and
Green Turtle Cay that sparkle.
13 A trait B personality C type D distinction
14 A pushed B given C thrown D bought
15 A sundry B galore C legion D replete
16 A propulsion B means C momentum D steam
17 A mode B pattern C way D manner
18 A thread B filament C line D string
****
1 D 2 A 3 A 4 D 5 B 6 C 7 B 8 C 9 D
10 C 11 B 12 B 13 B 14 C 15 B 16 D 17 A
18 D
----
Goat Racing
I was about to witness goat racing. Easter Monday in Buccoo Village. I was fighting my way through
ice-cream vans, (1) .... of people, food stalls and hot music singeing my eardrums. Even though the
general movement was towards the racecourse, I (2) .... my way through the crowds in an effort to
get a good pitch. An area had been (3) .... to make a course for competitors. Not quite on a (4) ....
with established racecourses, but on the similar assumption that spectators were to line either side
of a (5) .... of ground along which the participants·would travel. An attempt was being made to keep
a handful of select goats in order. No mean feat when dealing with an animal fabled to eat almost
anything it can get (6) .... of.
1 A flocks B shoals C hordes D herds
2 A handed B thumbed C fingered D elbowed
3 A cordoned off B shut away C penned in D closed down
4 A standard B rule C par D norm
5 A spread B stretch C space .. D span
6 A grip B hold Chang D grasp
Canoe Trip
As the day (7) .... to a close, I started to think about the night ahead, and I (8) .... with fear. The
canoe was too wet to sleep in, there was nowhere to stop, and we hadn't seen any villages or huts
since early morning. In the dim moonlight, and with the (9) ... . of our torch we could just make out
the line of the cliffs; the torch batteries were (10) .... , so we put in new 'ones, but they didn't work.
Obviously we weren't going to be able to spot a camping place. A couple of miles later, Lesley called
out that she had seen a distant flickering light and our hopes (11) .... : the light turned out to be
moonlight glinting on waves; soon we could hear the roaring noise of fai ;t-rushing water, though we
couldn't see what was happening. Time (12) .... still, and we moved on.
7 A led B pulled C drew D headed
8 A thumped B beat C throbbed D shuddered
9 A support B means C backing D aid
10 A dimming B failing C sinking D fainting
11 A soared B expanded C reared D ascended
12 A kept B waited C stood D remained
How to be Presentation Perfect - we answer your questions
/ I am not a natural at making presentations, yet in my role as managing director I am increasingly
required to present internally to my colleagues, (13) .. .. externally to the major shareholders. How
can I improve my presentational techniques and my confidence?
You are not the only one. Making a presentation involves completely different skills from those you
need to run a company, yet more and more senior executives are (14) .... to be accomplished at it.
If you are trying to convince your audience of something, you have to be convinced yourself.
Demonstrate your conviction in the passion and enthusiasm you (15) .. .. to the presentation. That
means you must do your homework. Test your proposition carefully in advance. Ask colleagues to
identify the 'hard questions' your audience might (16) .... to you. You also need to build a positive
climate from the (17) ..... Begin with an area of (18) .... ground that people can identify with and
build gradually towards the conclusion you want to reach.
13 A let alone B not to mention C besides D alongside
14 A demanded B called C expected D desired
15 A bring B bear C convey D deliver
16 A make B request C propose D put
17 A outset B outcome C outlook D output
18 A mutual B common C shared D similar
****
1 C 2 D 3 A 4 C 5 B 6 B 7 C 8 D 9 D
10 B 11 A 12 C 13 B 14 C 15 A 16 D 17 A
18 B
----
Listing
In Britain the badge of distinction awarded to historic buildings is unheroically called 'listing'. When
a building is listed it is (1) .... for preservation and it is expected to stand more or less indefinitely
- nobody expects it to be demolished, ever. But what is the (2) .... expectancy of, (3) .... , a
nineteenth-century terraced house? A few years ago most people assumed that such houses
would eventually wear out and be replaced - and millions were demolished in slum (4) ..... But
about 2.5 million of these terraces survive, and in some towns they are being given 'conservation
area' (5) .... , so don't expect the bulldozers there. The very low rates of demolition and
construction in the UK (6) .... that the building stock as a whole is ageing, and this has enormous
implications for the long-term sustainability of housing.
1 A branded
2 A time
3 A say
4 A removal
5 A quality
6 A mean
Shopping in Europe
B earmarked
B age
B imagine
B riddance
B class
B convey
C minted
C strength
C think
C clearance
C rank
C explain
D tagged
D life
D look
D dispatch
D status
D determine
The first self-service stores opened in America in the 1920s but they didn't catch on in Europe until
later, when the French forged ahead with their massive hypermarkets. Britain (7) . . . . behind.
Although the first self-service shop and the first supermarket were opened in the early 1940s, it
was thought that British housewives did not particularly want efficiency and speed. Surveys
showed that while American shoppers complained most about delays in check-out queues, British
ones objected to being pushed and (8) .... by other customers.
The (9) . . . . of supermarket shopping is impersonality, with no mediating salesman between
shopper and goods, only the 'silent persuaders' of packaging and display. However, there is a
current (10) .... towards 'boutiques', with personal service, within supermarkets - the butcher, the
baker, the fishmonger - and small specialist shops and farmers' markets are making a (11) .... in
Britain. In France, where every (12) .... provincial town, ringed by supermarkets, retains its
specialist food shops and weekly street market, the traditional co-exists with the new.
7 A dwelled B clung C deferred D lagged
8 A thrust B shoved C heaved D jerked
9 A crux B key C gist D essence
10 A momentum B trend C craze D vogue
11 A comeback B rebound C rally D pick-up
12 A self-regarding B self-appointed C self-respecting D self-conscious
Teeth
Smile at yourself in the mirror. Do you like what you see? If not, cosmetic dentistry could be the
answer. 'Dentistry has (13) .... a long way since the days of simple fillings and extractions,' says
London dental surgeon Dr Phil Stemmer, whose client list at his Teeth For Life clinic (14) .... pop
s4cars, actresses and even royalty, although his lips are tightly (15) .... on names. 'More and more
::-eople are turning to dentistry as a way of improving appearance,' he says. 'Shape, form, colour
a,--,d alignment all make noticeable differences to a smile, and by creating an improved smile I can
c--amatically alter a person's whole (16) .... of themselves.' Top actress Julia Roberts seems to be
r.:-.iversally (17) .... as the 'gold standard' in smiles, and, following her lead, one of the first
t:- ·,gs top models invest in is a perfect set of teeth to improve their chances of becoming cover-
·.1 (18) .....
13 A gone B been C come D done
, .! A proclaims B brags C trumpets D boasts
. 5 A d osed B glued C sealed D shut
4 - ·= A perception B observation C discernment D consciousness
., A ch&ered B hailed C saluted D exalted
.. : A s:uf; B substance C material D matter
****
1 B 2 D 3 A 4 C 5 D 6 A 7 D 8 B 9 D
10 B 11 A 12 C 13 C 14 D 15 C 16 A 17 B
18 C
----
Flight to Phoenix
I was booked on an early flight so I (1) .... no time in getting showered and dressed, and
(2) .... for the airport. It was only when I felt the aircraft leave the runway, and saw Manhattan
(3) .... into the distance beneath and behind me, that I finally began to relax.
Even at nine o'clock in the morning Phoenix was hot. It was a physical shock to walk out of
the cool, dark terminal into the bright reflection of the sunlight. Locals ambled slowly past in
short-sleeved shirts and sunglasses. In less than a minute I was sweating in my suit as I carried
my bags over to the large sign which read 'Bloomfield Weiss High Yield Bond Conference'.
They had (4) .... on white stretch limousines to take the conference participants to the hotel. Within
seconds, I was back in air-conditioned quiet again. I supposed that it was (5) .... possible to spend
all of your life in Phoenix at 18° centigrade, with only brief (6) .... of extra heat as you transferred
from air-conditioned house to air-conditioned car to air-conditioned office.
1 A used B lost C left D made
2 A headed B pressed C proceeded D set
3 A abating B withdrawing C receding D reversing
4 A laid B catered C sorted D furnished
5 A purely B perfectly C starkly D solidly
6 A gales B torrents C fits D bursts
Keas - not just pretty parrots
Few birds are as (7) .... curious as keas. New research shows how these New Zealand parrots
channel that curiosity for maximum benefit: they (8) .... up tips by watching each other. Keas are
notorious for investigating and, in the (9) .... , often destroying everything from rubbish bins to
windscreen wipers. Ludwig Huber and colleagues from the University of Vienna have found that in
keas, which live in family flocks, social learning affects patterns of curiosity. In their experiments,
the keas' task was to open a steel box with a complex locking mechanism. Two birds were
gradually trained as 'models' and then they (10) .... the task again under the watchful gaze of keas
who were new to the job. (11) .... enough, birds who had watched a demonstration had a much
higher success (12) .... than keas who had never watched one.
7 A insatiably B hungrily C thirstily D unmanageably
8 A take B lift C pick D pull
9 A procedure B process C measure D technique
10 A enacted B staged C performed D presented
11 A Certain B Sure C True D Fair
12 A proportion B percentage C occurrence D rate
Bureaucracy
Given that bureaucracy is held in such ill (13) .... today, it is hard to remember that it was once
considered a great organisational innovation. By organising the (14) .... of labour, by making
::-.c.nagement and decision-making a profession, and by providing an order and a set of rules that
~wed many different kinds of specialists to work in coordination toward a common (15) .... ,
t(.1reaucracy greatly extended the breadth and depth of intelligence that organisations could
2chieve. Begun as a system of organising government activities, it has (16) .... to big business and
L:.:ge organisations of all kinds.
,.tax Weber, who (17) .... the systematic study of bureaucracy as its role in western society began
;.:> explode in the late nineteenth century, saw bureaucracy as both the most efficient possible
s:,-s~sm. and a threat to the basic liberties he (18) .... dear, thus foreshadowing the sentiments
-..."-.d'l bureaucracy frequently evokes today.
.1..3. A notoriety B knowledge C repute D name ... A division B distinction C detachment D divergence
15 A end B finish C culmination D termination
... - :: A c2.rri ed B spread C transmitted D caught ., A opened B sprang C launched D fired
.. - A kJ-:ed B felt C knew D held
****
1 B 2 A 3 C 4 A 5 B 6 D 7 A 8 C 9 B
10 C 11 B 12 D 13 C 14 A 15 A 16 B 17 C
18 D
----
Professional sport
When I talk about practice, I mean something individual. If you look at professional golfers or tennis
players, you will observe that practice (1) .... the basis of their preparation for tournaments. Of
course it does, (2) .... these are individual sports. Training is simply doing the physical work
necessary to be sufficiently fit, but practice entails making an analysis of one's game, locating its
weak points, and working to (3) .... them. If your opponent keeps winning points by serving high
to your backhand, there's no place to hide; you either have to (4) .... the weakness, or you'll keep
losing to him. He'll exploit your weaknesses mercilessly.
Part of what is fascinating, and slightly repellent, about sport lies in that curious inversion of values
(5) . . . . much that we admire in ordinary life - humility, compassion, unwillingness to take
advantage of the weakness of others - is reversed on the field of play. Professional sport is all
about winning. And, within (6) .... the more you practise (and the more you train), the better your
chances of doing so.
1 A lays B composes C enacts D forms
2 A albeit B for C as with D let alone
3 A eradicate B rid C wipe D extinguish
4 A alter B square C reform D rectify
5 A insofar B whereby C thereof D hence
6 A due B sense C reason D merit
Introduction to a magazine feature
Are your cupboards bursting at the seams, your bag full of unwanted receipts, sweet wrappers and
chewed up pens? Do you often spend ages searching for keys, or telephone numbers (7) .... down
on the backs of envelopes? If the answer is 'yes', then worry no more. The order and calm you
long for is nearer than you think. Just follow our guide to decluttering your life.
It's difficult to think clearly or creatively, to relax or (8) .... , if you live amongst piles of junk. Clutter
has a way of controlling us. When our environment is in a (9) .... , our minds can also feel
disordered. When rubbish is allowed to (10) .... up, and stagnate, a combination of frustration,
confusion and lethargy (11) .... ; we can feel stuck and unsure of our direction. Clearing out unused
and unwanted (12) .... allows us to focus more clearly. Try for yourself and see.
7 A jotted B penned C doodled D etched
8 A unfold B unleash C unload D unwind
9 A dump B chaos C mess D tip
10 A clog B build C stock D grow
11 A holds on B stands out C joins up D sets in
12 A features B items C matters D entities
Problem staff
The issue of problem staff in restaurants covers a multitude of sins. Usually poor service comes
(13) .. .. to the behaviour of an individual employee, but it's also the restaurant's responsibility.
\'/hy should restaurant managers tolerate bad attitudes? When you do get a less than helpful
wai~er, it's tempting to suggest to the manager or owner that the individual concerned might be
be~er employed elsewhere - not in the service industry, perhaps. (14) .... are they're already
c.v,·are of such 'attitude issues' and tolerate bad behaviour for reasons best (15) .... to themselves.
Tr.is is when it's worth remembering that a service charge isn't mandatory. (16) .... them where it
r J:1s - in the (17) .... packet, and eventually they might (18) .... the message.
13 A over B along Cup D down
1~ A Possibilities B Chances C Eventualities D Prospects
15 A renowned B familiar C known D acknowledged
15 A Tap B Knock C Hit D Strike
17 A pay B salary C wages D earnings
•= ;.. ec.:ch B get C take D grasp
****
1 D
10 B
18 B
2B 3A 4D SB
11 D 12 B 13 D
6 C
14 B
7 A
15 C
8 D
16 C
9 C
17 A
----
The Tintin books
What is so special about Georges 'Herge' Remi's tales of the adventures of a boy called Tintin,
created for a newspaper in Belgium in the 1920s, that they should have (1) .... being translated
into more than 50 languages and selling more than 120 million copies? How is it that they have
managed to endure for so long? One reason may be Herge's extraordinary attention to detail. He
constantly revised and improved Tintin's original black-and-white adventures to make them more
(2) .... to new audiences. And he based all his illustrations on an extensive personal library of
photographs which he (3) .... over the years.
In a career of more than 50 years, Herge produced only 24 Tintin books. Had he been less
meticulous, he might well have been a lot more (4) .... , but I doubt he would have been so widely
loved and admired. Picking up a Tintin book the other day for the first time in many years, I found
myself (5) .... between the urge to race through the story and an (6) .... to linger on the visual
detail.
1 A turned out B finished off C come to D ended up
2 A relevant B apt C applicable D fitting
3 A amassed B mustered C convened D swelled
4 A abundant B prolific C fruitful D profuse
5 A pulled B drawn C lured D torn
6 A impetus B incentive C impulse D intuition
Cave fauna
For the past 35 years a professor of zoology named Valerio Sbordoni has explored the caves and
underground chambers of Mexico in search of new forms of life. He has found these in abundance,
to say the least. To (7) .... Sbordoni has discovered more than 150 species of (8) .... unknown
cave-dwelling creatures. In one chamber (9) .... , he found over forty (10) .... species of butterfly,
an incredible variety for such an inhospitable environment.
Many of these species, Sbordoni believes, (11) .... underground millions of y~ars ago to avoid
extinction and adapted to life beneath the earth's surface. Obviously, conditions for life
underground are far from ideal, and Sbordoni believes that only severe climatic changes, probably
caused by shifting glaciers, could (12) .... such a migration.
7 A now B present C today D date
8 A hitherto B hereby C henceforth D herewith
9 A exclusively B only C alone D solely
10 A dissimilar B distinct C disparate D disconnected
11 A retired B shrank C retreated D departed
12 A conjure up B account for C bear out D carry off
Sadie and her son
A combination of boredom and, increasingly, absenteeism, ensured that the standard of Eric's work
declined alarmingly. Sadie, who had hoped that her son would do well at school, was too (13) .... a
mother to have remained unaware of the problem for very long, but when the school reports started
ta (14) ... . just how poorly he was faring, she felt shocked and angry.
Orie report (15) .... curtly that Eric was 45th out of 49 pupils. Sadie, typically, was determined that
r-..sr son should arrest his dizzying decline as speedily as possible and then - she hoped - start
t:> i:nprove. She visited the school and offered to pay for further tuition but was told, 'It would be
~Dney down the (16) .... .' This rejection only seemed to (17) .... Sadie on in her search for a
~- ::: :)le career for Eric. It surprised no one who knew her that she reacted to the undeniably
(1 8) .... disappointment of this setback in such a remarkably spirited and positive manner.
13 A engrossed B mindful C riveted D attentive
•. ..I. . A p~oclaim B advocate C denote D underline
, 5 A pro;essed B announced C aired D uttered
.i 5 . .
,.. pl;>? B drain C sink D gutter
•7 A 5;AJr B press C incite D boost
·- :... .. -,id B stark C bitter D hard
****
1 D 2 A 3 A 4 B 5 D 6 C 7 D 8 A 9 C
10 B 11 C 12 B 13 D 14 D 15 B A6 B 17 A
18 C
----
Fashion
Fashion is often seen as a modern phenomenon, entirely (1) .... upon nineteenth- and twentiethcentury
capitalism for its development. Most historians of fashion are at (2) .... to point out, though,
that fashion, at least in the (3) .... of style and design, has a very long history. They often (4) .... the
rise of the market and mercantile trade in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries as their starting
point.
As societies have developed in complexity, populations have expanded, and multiple technologies
for producing an increasing variety of clothing and physical adornment have been discovered, so
the meanings attached to dress have also increased in their complexity and significance.
Consequently, it is difficult to say with any (5) .... of certainty today what any item of clothing or
adornment actually means. For example, a man's suit, (6) .... an indicator of the most extreme
uniformity, actually conveys very differing meanings in different contexts and to different people.
1 A responsible B subject C conditional D dependent
2 A effort B pains C agony D trouble
3 A scale B frame C sense D aspect
4 A take B get C put D make
5 A ratio B element C degree D shadow
6 A definitely B supposedly C evidently D obviously
Writer
Newspaper reports of publishers in (7) .... wars over whizz-kid manuscripts have resulted in a skewed
idea of what life is like for your average novelist. Down at my end of the business - i.e. not exactly
topping the best-seller lists - there are two ways of making ends (8) ..... The wisest among us write
in the evenings and have other full-time jobs that will still be there even if the book doesn't immediately
get (9) .... up and turned into a film. Those such as myself, however, are literary odd-jobbers, (10) ....
on a bit of teaching, the occasional workshop and articles like this. l have (11) .... tell of an in-house
writing opportunity offered by a chocolate factory, but I've never managed to get anything like that.
Somehow, though, by (12) .... of juggling part-time jobs and credit cards and also, more often than
not, thanks to the generosity of those names you find in Acknowledgements, the novel gets written.
7 A petitioning B bidding C tendering D proffering
8 A join B meet C connect D tie
9 A swallowed B gobbled C sucked D snapped
1 O A subsisting B enduring C abiding D prevailing
11 A noted B heard C received D experienced
12 A way B attempt C dint D reason
Sudden Fame
The small (13) .... we were performing at around the country were all beginning to sell (14) .... and
extra bouncers were having to be called in to hold back the growing legion of screaming girls. We
found ourselves having to use secret entrances to the village halls and ballrooms we were playing
to prevent ourselves being mobbed by fans. On the few nights a week when we were not working,
we found it difficult to leave the house without being pursued through the streets by adoring
followers. In a (15) .... of days, we had been transformed into celebrities. Our moves were monitored
by our admirers and all of our needs (16) .... for by our management and other interested parties.
Even though the shyness that had always accompanied me never quite went away, it was replaced
by a strange naive over-confidence that only naturally shy people who have been thrust into similar
situations can (17) .... to. In short, I was emotionally totally out of my (18) .....
13 A sites B venues C scenes D abodes
14 A out B up C off Don
15 A course B question C spell D matter
16 A answered B catered C afforded D granted
17 A identify B relate C ally D connect
18 A depth B extent C level D reach
****
1 D 2 B 3 C 4 A 5 C 6 B 7 B 8 B 9 D
10 A 11 B 12 C 13 B 14 A 15 D 16 B 17 B
18 A
----
Citizen Kane
When the film Citizen Kane finally appeared in 1941, despite the brouhaha that attended its (1) ....
- delayed because of distributors' fears of the harm William Randolph Hearst, its (2) .... subject,
might do to them - and largely ecstatic reviews, it was not a commercial success. It was television
that brought it back to the public consciousness. It is perhaps the one film, above all others, that has
inspired people to become film-makers. This is all the more astonishing since it was Orson Welles's
first film. Welles always (3) .... that its success arose from his having no idea of what he was or
wasn't allowed to do: he just went ahead and did it. But he had an extraordinary team at his (4) .... ,
cameraman Gregg Toland, screenwriter Herman J. Mankiewicz, and the special-effects wizard
Linwood Dunn. When Welles and Mankiewicz (5) .. .. on the idea of portraying a newspaper magnate
who both was and wasn't Hearst, Welles realised that he had found a perfect vehicle for himself both
as director and actor, and (6) .... his chance with the energy of a whirlwind.
1 A issue B release C publication D broadcast
2 A attested B admitted C alleged D affirmed
3 A maintained B upheld C detailed D specified
4 A disposal B invitation Chand D option
5 A latched B jumped C caught D hit
6 A gripped B plucked C seized D wrenched
Dermot and Carmel
Dermot thought that Carmel was rather odd that morning. Twice he had said that he might be fate
and not to worry if he (7) .... into the golf club on the way home. He had to have a natter with someone
and that was the best place to have it. Twice she had (8) .... her head amiably and distantly as if she
hadn't really heard or understood.
'Will you be all right? What are you going to do today?' he had asked.
She had smiled. 'Funny you should ask that. I was just thinking that I hadn't anything to do all day
so I was going to (9) .... downtown and look at the shops. I was thinking that it was almost a sinful
thing, just (10) .... away the day.'
Dermot had smiled back. 'You're (11) ... . to enjoy yourself. And as I said, if I'm late I won't want
anything to eat. So don't (12) .... to any trouble.'
'No, that's fine,' she said.
7 A fell B bumped C dropped D cut
8 A nodded B gestured C shrugged D stirred
9 A pace B tread C step D stroll
10 A drifting B killing C easing D idling
11 A sanctioned B entitled C justified D rightful
12 A take B get C go D put
Title Race
Tea boy? Do you mind, I'm a mobile lukewarm beverage resource facilitator.
Human nature provides the most divine of comedies. (13) .. .. a recent study which has informed the
nation that job titles are a prime cause of envy and unrest at work. A survey by a leading firm of
recruitment consultants found that 90% of employers and 70% of employees admit that titles create
(14) .... among colleagues.
Most shockingly, the survey found that 70% of office workers would be willing to (15) .... a pay rise
in favour of a more 'motivational' or 'professional' job title. If our vanity is (16) .... such proportions
that even basic greed is being overwhelmed, we are indeed in dire straits.
The truth is that in these brave new days of the early twenty-first century, nobody is content to be
(17) .... subordinate. The titles under discussion (18) .... the emphasis on ability (specialist,
coordinator) but are, in fact, little more than euphemisms.
13 A Corroborate B Testify C Confirm D Witness
14 A compartments B demarcations C divisions D partitions
15 A forgo B revoke C forbear D resign
16 A attaining B reaching C touching D finding
17 A defined B marked C labelled D identified
18 A place B set C fix D allocate
****
1 B 2 C 3 A 4 A 5 D 6 C 7 C 8 A 9 D
10 D 11 B 12 C 13 D 14 C 15 A 16 B 17 C
18 A
----
Amateur Astronomy
Many things have changed in astronomy over the past half-century. Until about 30 years ago, there
was a great (1) .... of charts and catalogues. Telescopic equipment was limited and there were few
books on practical astronomy. Today, the range of off-the-shelf telescopes and equipment covers
almost everything one could need. Electronic calculators and computers have revolutionised
almanacs and chart production, and (2) .... the analysis of observations and the publication of
results.
All this must surely make this the golden (3) .... of amateur astronomy. Well, perhaps, but a great
deal has been lost as well. Now one may have to travel 80 km to find a sky comparable to that found
in urban areas 50 years ago. The daytime skies are now (4) .... by aircraft condensation trails which
can (5) .... for hours and often spread out to form amorphous clouds, making solar observations
impossible and (6) .... night-time observation too.
1 A deficiency B shortfall C inadequacy D shortage
2 A facilitated B maximised C cultivated D upheld
3 A period B age C time D term
4 A bothered B plagued C troubled D badgered
5 A proceed B pursue C prolong D persist
6 A hampering B smothering C overcoming D combating
Too Much Choice
Society is becoming 'overchoiced'. There are too many things to do, too many options, too many
opportunities. In the new economy, the desire for the new product, service or next big thing is an
addiction, and technology simply accelerates the (7) .... of change: the noise, the (8) .... of new
goods and services, offering more and more choice. No sooner has the new product emerged off
this virtual production line than the next one is about to be (9) ..... The head spins, the brain races,
the fatigue (10) .... ; the disconnection from life begins.
Choice is the mantra of the new economy, but more choice means more stress, less time and more
complexity. Hence a new trend is (11) ..... The search is on for 'simplexity' - the simple things that
give meaning in an increasingly complex world. But simpl'i fying your life is not easy in an age of
economic excess. There are more basic brands of detergent and breakfast cereals than we can ever
need or want, more software upgrades, features and calling plans than we can keep (12) .... of.
7 A motion B step C pace D movement
8 A proliferation B escalation C extension D augmentation
9 A initiated B embarked C instituted D launched
10 A sets in B gives in C sets up D gives up
11 A aground B afoot C abreast D afire
12 A track B sight C trace D hold
McAndrews Hotel
Every summer we spend a fortnight in McAndrews Hotel in North Mayo, Ireland. It is a family
tradition, (13) .... by my grandmother, and by now it has achieved a certain sacredness. Nothing is
allowed to interfere with the ritual. We are of a kind, McAndrews clientele: old-fashioned, odd
perhaps, some would say snobbish. I do not like the bad manners, the insolence of shop assistants
which (14) .... for egalitarianism in this present age; I resent chummy overtures from waiters who
sometimes appear to (15) .... themselves with difficulty from slapping one on the back. I know most
of my fellow-guests' names - like me they have been coming here since they were children - yet
can {16) .... assured that when I meet any of them in any part of the hotel, I shall be spared all social
intercourse (17) .... a civil word of greeting. Such respect for dignity and personal privacy is (18) ....
to come by in commercial establishments these days.
13 A constructed B prompted C heralded D instigated
14 A passes B poses C claims D serves
15 A restrict B repress C restrain 0 retract
16 A stand B rest C stay D keep
17 A on top of B rather than C as much as D apart from
18 A slow B rare C hard D seldom
****
1 D 2 A 3 B 4 B 5 D 6 A 7 C 8 A 9 D
10 A 11 B 12 A 13 D 14 A 15 C 16 B 17 D
18 C
----
Photography
When a photographer takes a photograph, he or she makes a selection of visual information that is
(1) .... by his or her technical and aesthetic skills, personal views and experience, together with a
(2) .... of social and cultural norms. And in the (3) .... of this book we shall see how these factors not
only affect the style, content and expression of a photograph, but also how those images are
perceived and responded to by the viewer. For example, we might consider that the (4) .... reader
of a newspaper will have an implicit understanding of the photographic images reproduced on the
page. But rather than accepting the photograph at face (5) .... , we might question whether it
accurately recorded the scene as it would have looked at the time. Or, in contrast, does it
communicate the photographer's point of view? Is it the (6) .... instant recorded that is of particular
importance, or should the photograph on the page be understood as a symbol to represent a state
of affairs in the world?
1 A concluded B imposed C determined D directed
2 A group B set C band D batch
3 A course B progress C means D process
4 A shallow B casual C slight D random
5 A regard B esteem C respect D value
6 A accurate B definite C precise D absolute
More than a game
Sport for me has always been more than just a game. The most successful people in sport have
total self-belief. You need tunnel (7) .... if you want to succeed in sport. There's only one route to
being the best and you have to put everything else to one (8) ..... Sport is ruthless and no one else
is going to do it for you. It's sink or (9) .....
Sport has taught me personal discipline and determination, but it can also teach you the benefits of
working as one of a team. My sport allows and encourages you to (10) .... individually, yet it is a
team game and you have to balance these two aspects. It's very much like life - you can succeed
as an individual, but you must never forget there are others around you.
Sport has given me a great deal - and not just financially. It has opened (11) .... for me and opened
my eyes, and I've seen things around the world that others will never see. But you also have to give
up a lot for those (12) .....
7 A sight B view C vision D outlook
8 A margin B side C part D edge
9 A swim B float C sail D drift
10 A outdo B surpass C outshine D excel
11 A gates B doors C windows D barriers
12 A supplements B tips C perks D complements
Tuning in
Some experiences (13) .... themselves so sharply on our memory that they form islands of clarity
in our recollection. For me, such a momentous (14) .... took place one night in California many years
ago, when I lay awake listening to the rapturous strains of a mockingbird singing from an invisible
(15) .... in one of the tall trees that were (16) .... around the suburban neighbourhood. I don't suffer
from insomnia - it was the exquisite artistry of the singer that kept me awake. As I followed his
intricately woven melodies, I found myself (17) .... into an unexpected aesthetic environment. In
order to follow the patterns that issued from the bird, I had to call on my experience of jazz and Indian
classical music. The bird had me (18) .... that I was being treated to an ad lib performance of the
most breathtaking improvisational acrobatics. I groaned and I cheered as one improbable musical
variation followed another through the open window where I lay listening, until finally I fell asleep.
13 A etch B scratch C trace D cut
14 A proceeding B circumstance C development D occasion
15 A venue B location C situation D area
16 A spotted B dabbed C dotted D flecked
17 A engaged B captivated C pushed D drawn
18 A prevailed B proved C convinced D confirmed
****
1 C 2 B 3 A 4 B 5 D 6 C 7 C 8 B 9 A
10 D 11 B 12 C 13 A 14 D 15 B 16 C 17 D
18 C
----