Air-conditioning

There is a chill in the air at Cannons Gym, a favourite lunch-time haunt for City of London workers.
To deal with this summer's unusually high temperatures, the fitness centre has
gone (1) .... with the air-conditioning. (2) .... , in fact, that at quiet times, the gym feels like
somewhere in the Arctic. This is just one example of how the modern world casually (3) .... air-
conditioning. It has become a central feature of work and play, a potent (4) .... of the ability of
humanity to control the climate, or at least modify it. 

Many air-conditioned buildings, however, could (5) .... other methods of cooling. They could take
advantage of daylight and natural ventilation and have thicker walls that absorb less heat during 
the day and radiate it away at night. These (6) .... may sound obvious, but they can have telling 
results and would considerably reduce the need for air-conditioning.

1 A overweight   B overboard   C overtime   D overblown
2 A So much so   B So as to   C So to speak   D So be it
3 A malfunctions   B outdoes   C superimposes   D misuses
4 A symbol   B token   C emblem   D label
5 A empower   B engage   C employ   D enlist
6 A outcomes   B measures   C resolutions   D actionst



Sundials

It is surely more than coincidence that the beginning of a new millennium is being (7) .... by renewed
 interest in sundials: instruments used to measure time according to the position of the sun. A 
hundred years ago, they were a vital time-keeping (8) .... , essential for anyone who hoped to keep 
their clocks working accurately. Then, as clocks and watches became more sophisticated and
reliable, the sundial was relegated to the (9) .... of garden ornament - a romantic and intriguing
ornament, but (10) .... an anachronism, in a brave new technological age. Now the clock has been
turned back and they are again being taken seriously. 

David Harber, a sundial maker, believes that their appeal (11) .... in their direct link with the planets.
He says that when he delivers one, there is a (12) .... of magic when it starts working. They are
still, calm, romantic objects that remind us of our place in the cosmos.

7 A associated   B accompanied   C acquainted   D aroused
8 A device  B utensil   C piece   D item
9 A cluster   B set   C group   D status
10 A conversely   B after all   C nonetheless   D in turn
11 A stands   B displays   C evolves   D lies
12 A moment   B point  C time   D pause

Paint Your Own China

My image of china-painting (13) .... from a visit, long ago, to an arts and crafts exhibition where
stern-looking grey-haired ladies demonstrated how to cover a teacup with delicate flowers using a
(14) .... of deft brushstrokes. The spectacle was (15) .... , because each stroke formed a perfect
petal or leaf. Their hands never wobbled, the paint never smudged, and the observer might have
concluded that these women had either been (16) .... their art for decades or had been born with
an extraordinary talent for steady precision. 

(17) .... of this experience, I wondered what kind of people would have the courage to enrol on a 
course in china-painting. Would even the beginners display an (18) .... artistry? In fact, the
 atmosphere turned out to be far from intimidating. The students were all there to have tun and not
 even the tutor wanted to paint petals on teacups with the robotic rapidity I had remembered.

13 A stemmed   B initiated   C commenced   D instigated
14 A string   B collection   C series   D procession
15 A sensitive   B riveting   C charismatic   D distinctive
16 A practising   B exercising   C working   D expressing
17 A In respect   B Careful   C On reflection   D Mindful
18 A intuitive   B inward  C inverted   D integral


****

1 B 2 A 3 D 4 A 5 C 6 B 7 B 8 A 9 D
10 C11 D 12 A 13 A 14 C 15 B 16 A
17 D 18 A

----


Sand

Much as I admire sand's miraculous ability to be transformed into useful objects like glass and 
concrete, I am not a great fan of it in its (1) .... state.To me it is primarily a hostile barrier that stands
between a seaside car park and the water itself. It blows in your face, (2) .... in your sandwiches,
and swallows vital objects like car keys and coins. When you are wet it (3) .... to you like 'stucco', 
and cannot be (4) .... , even with a fireman's hose. But, and here's the strange thing, the moment 
you step onto a beach towel, climb into a car or walk across a recently vacuumed carpet, it pours
off you. For days afterwards, you tip mysteriously undiminishing piles of it onto the floor every time 
you take off your shoes, and spray the vicinity with lots more when you (5) .... your socks. Sand
stays with you for longer than many contagious diseases. No, you can (6) .... sand, as far as I am 
concerned.

1 A normal   B natural   C unrefined   D unmixed
2 A enters   B seeps   C gets   D comes
3 A adheres   B attracts   C fixes   D grips
4 A shorn   B scraped   C shoved   D shifted
5 A peel off   B roll away   C move off   D strip away
6 A have   B keep   C hold   D store



Lock and Key

The search for a safe home, for privacy and security, has existed ever since human beings first
built a permanent homestead. The rope-lifted beam behind the door may have (7) .... to an
electronic lock triggered by a plastic card with more combinations than there are atoms in the
universe, but the (8) .... to shut out the 'bad guys' remains. The appeal of a lock and key is, to
some (9) .... , psychological. Recently, various companies have experimented with computerised
locking systems, where smart cards, swiped through a 'reader', control electronic locks by means
of a digital (10) ..... But people don't like them. You may be (11) .... to put up with it at work, but at
home, everyone wants the (12) .... of turning a physical key in a lock. As a result, when one
locksmith company developed a new electronic system, they made sure they incorporated a proper
metal key into the device.

7 A taken on   B given way   C handed down   D passed over
8 A force   B craving  C shove   D urge
9 A extent   B rate  C measure   D scale
10 A directive   B command   C rule   D manipulation
11 A agreeable   B liable   C prepared   D geared
12 A reassurance   B guarantee   C endorsement   D confirmation



Modern Art

I was nervous about visiting the new Tate Modern gallery as, like many people, I can make head 
nor (13) .... of modern art. I know I quite like some of it, furry things in particular, neon light 
sculptures and massive photographs. Perhaps if I were better informed about it, I'd have an opinion
on more things. There again, you're not meant to (14) .... about it in a school-essay way. The point 
is not to grasp art, but to let it communicate with you. This is a splendid idea but one that never
worked for me in (15) ..... But this new gallery has tried to give the visitor a genuine insight into
the whys and wherefores of the works. The first thing I noticed were the labels, proper labels that
set a work in (16) .... and actually told you what it was trying to say. Instead of staring (17) .... at
the pictures as I used to, these (18) .... of information helped me understand.

13 A foot   B tail   C heart   D heel
14 A set   B look   C start   D put
15 A honesty   B purpose   C practice   D action
16 A context   B place   C contrast   D situation
17 A barely   B clearly   C blankly   D plainly
18 A nuggets   B abstracts   C extracts   D cuttings

****

1 B 2 C 3 A 4 D 5 A 6 B 7 B 8 D 9 A
10 B11 C 12 A 13 B 14 A 15 C 16 A
17 C 18 A

----

Metals
It may have been a wish for self-adornment that (1) .... the interest of Stone Age people in metals.
Sitting by the side of a river, waiting for a fish to come within a spear's throw, or just
(2) .... away a moment, one of our early ancestors might have happened upon a shiny yellow pebble
and plucked it off the river (3) ..... It did not have the feel of stone, but it was attractive. In such a
way, one could (4) .... that gold entered the lives of primitive people.

(5) .... the malleability of the metal, it very soon became a much sought-after material. Copper may
also have been discovered by accident, and once the value of copper tools was realised, the search
for its ores and for ways of getting the copper out of them was (6) .... with vigour. Thus,
metalworking was added to our ancestors' battery of life-enhancing accomplishments.

1 A aroused B enlivened C cultivated D incited
2 A passing B idling C occupying D employing
3 A track B bed C floor D path
4 A conjecture B disclose C fabricate D prophesy
5 A Providing B Thanks C Given D Resulting
6 A raced B chased C tracked D pursued


St Ives

There was silence as we (7) .... our bags down the winding, cobbled lane that led to the heart of
town, {8) .... double against the force eight gale and trying in vain to avoid the icy waves that
(9) .... over the promenade. There was no one on the streets and the shutters in every cottage on
the waterfront were bolted tight against the battering. We had watched the weather worsen as we
chugged into St Ives on the tiny single-track railway. As the ominous grey skies (10) .... in, visiting
Cornwall in the off-season - without a car - no longer seemed such a good idea. I had (11) .... my
friend into joining me with the (12) .... of walks along the beautiful Cornish coast, and snug evenings,
toasting ourselves before open fires.

7 A lugged B clambered C grabbed D lumbered
8 A leant B bent C sloped D borne
9 A smashed B engulfed C splattered D erupted
10 A folded B came C closed D blew
11 A drawn B lured C trapped D led
12 A provision B project C proposal D promise


Computer Modelling

The problem with studying the past is that it is past. The people who (13) .... in times of peace and
plenty and struggled through conflict and drought are long dead. The forces that (14) .... them to
settle here or move there, that brought them together as families and clans, villages and cities,
have (15) .... from memory. Archaeology provides {16) .... and clues, but we cannot test our
hypotheses with experiments on cultures living or dead. We cannot rewind the tape and watch a
replay of the past. Then again, perhaps we can.

Computer modelling allows us to recreate prehistoric landscapes and environments and (17) ....
them with virtual communities - digital creations with some of the needs, independence and
capabilities of real-world humans. We can establish (18) .... of conduct and replicate social units.
Then we can turn down the rainfall - or turn up the population - and watch how this cyber-culture
and its artificial people react.

13 A endured B enriched C prevailed D prospered
14 A sought B made C drove D chose
15 A dissolved B faded C lapsed D slipped
16 A hints B tips C prompts D cribs
11 A fulfil B inhabit C populate D settle
18 A etiquette B ways C manners D rules

****

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)
l A 2 B 3 B 4 A 5 C 6 D 7 A 8 B 9 A
10 C 11 B 12 D 13 D 14 C 15 B 16 A
17 C 18 D

----


Surviving in a Foreign land 

I have been welcomed warmly. It's a sociable and well-provisioned base camp in a very, very
isolated place. At any one time, there are some forty odd souls - scientists, students, weathermen,
satellite trackers - in a (1) .... community where everyone mucks (2) ., ... My school French is
proving adequate - just - to (3) .... , but not to chat or banter. I miss the nuances, and my
phrasebook is useless at breakfast.

There is no practical problem for me in this, but initially there was a problem of self-confidence. I
found myself slightly dreading mealtimes. I would (4) .... , worried about which table to choose,
terrified at the silence which (5) .... when I spoke, anxious in a way I cannot remember since the
first weeks of school. I still grin inanely, or panic when people talk to me. I suspect the cause of
this occasional depression is nothing to do with loss of company or communication; it's because
I've lost the social predominance which my own gift of the gab has always (6) .... me.

1 A close-knit B close-fitting C close-run D close-cropped
2 A about B around C in D up
3 A articulate B communicate C converse D interpret
4 A bend back B turn back C lean back D hang back
5 A dropped B fell C hit D struck
6 A afforded B empowered C entitled D presented

Elliot

When I first met Elliot, I was just a young author like any other and he took no notice of me. He
never forgot a face though, and when I (7) .... him here or there he shook hands with me cordially,
but showed no desire to (8) .... our acquaintance; and if I saw him at the opera, say, he being with
a person of high rank, he was (9) .... not to catch sight of me. But then I (10) .... to make a somewhat
startling success as a playwright, and presently I became aware that Elliot (11) .... me with a warmer
feeling. One day, I received a note from him asking me to lunch and I conceived the (12) .... that
he was trying me out. But from then on, since my success had brought me many new friends, I
began to see him more frequently.

7 A ran across B fell in with C saw through D took up with
8 A accelerate B advance C further D promote
9 A inclined B inspired C vulnerable D susceptible
10 A developed B happened C transpired D grew
11 A held B observed C took D regarded
12 A impression B suspicion C notion D opinion

Alfred Hitchcock

The film director Alfred Hitchcock always insisted that he didn't care about the (13) .... matter
of his films, or (14) .... about the acting, but that he did care about the photography and the
soundtrack and all the technical ingredients. For Hitchcock, it wasn't a message that (15) .... the
audience, nor was it a great performance; he believed that people are aroused by pure film,
(16) .... of their cultural background. Therefore, if a picture is designed correctly, in terms of its
emotional (17) .... , the Japanese audience should scream at the same moment as the Indian
audience.

Hitchcock's self-appraisal was always precise, rational, deceptively unanswerable; he was a man
of reason and a craftsman of genius who liked to hear an audience scream. He didn't deal in
speculation, abstraction or intellectual allusion, and his assessment of his own screen characters
was not exploratory. He set his (18) .... on film, pure film, and the most dispassionate,
mathematically calculable beauty of what a strip of film can be made to do to an audience.

13 A topic B content C subject D theme
14 A whether B indeed C instead D rather
15 A stirred B riled C raised D sparked
16 A unremarked B unrelated C irrelevant D irrespective
17 A involvement B feedback C impact D response
18 A views B targets C aims D sights

****

Part 1 (one mark for each correct answer)
1 A 2 C 3 B 4 D 5 B 6 A 7 A 8 C 9 A
11 D 12 C 13 C 14 B 15 A 16 D
17 C 18 D

----

