The Tintin books
What is so special about Georges 'Herge' Remi's tales of the adventures of a boy called Tintin,
created for a newspaper in Belgium in the 1920s, that they should have (1) .... being translated
into more than 50 languages and selling more than 120 million copies? How is it that they have
managed to endure for so long? One reason may be Herge's extraordinary attention to detail. He
constantly revised and improved Tintin's original black-and-white adventures to make them more
(2) .... to new audiences. And he based all his illustrations on an extensive personal library of
photographs which he (3) .... over the years.
In a career of more than 50 years, Herge produced only 24 Tintin books. Had he been less
meticulous, he might well have been a lot more (4) .... , but I doubt he would have been so widely
loved and admired. Picking up a Tintin book the other day for the first time in many years, I found
myself (5) .... between the urge to race through the story and an (6) .... to linger on the visual
detail.
1 A turned out B finished off C come to D ended up
2 A relevant B apt C applicable D fitting
3 A amassed B mustered C convened D swelled
4 A abundant B prolific C fruitful D profuse
5 A pulled B drawn C lured D torn
6 A impetus B incentive C impulse D intuition
Cave fauna
For the past 35 years a professor of zoology named Valerio Sbordoni has explored the caves and
underground chambers of Mexico in search of new forms of life. He has found these in abundance,
to say the least. To (7) .... Sbordoni has discovered more than 150 species of (8) .... unknown
cave-dwelling creatures. In one chamber (9) .... , he found over forty (10) .... species of butterfly,
an incredible variety for such an inhospitable environment.
Many of these species, Sbordoni believes, (11) .... underground millions of years ago to avoid
extinction and adapted to life beneath the earth's surface. Obviously, conditions for life
underground are far from ideal, and Sbordoni believes that only severe climatic changes, probably
caused by shifting glaciers, could (12) .... such a migration.
7 A now B present C today D date
8 A hitherto B hereby C henceforth D herewith
9 A exclusively B only C alone D solely
10 A dissimilar B distinct C disparate D disconnected
11 A retired B shrank C retreated D departed
12 A conjure up B account for C bear out D carry off
Sadie and her son
A combination of boredom and, increasingly, absenteeism, ensured that the standard of Eric's work
declined alarmingly. Sadie, who had hoped that her son would do well at school, was too (13) .... a 
mother to have remained unaware of the problem for very long, but when the school reports started 
to (14) ... . just how poorly he was faring, she felt shocked and angry.
One report (15) .... curtly that Eric was 45th out of 49 pupils. Sadie, typically, was determined that 
her son should arrest his dizzying decline as speedily as possible and then - she hoped - start 
to improve. She visited the school and offered to pay for further tuition but was told, 'It would be 
money down the (16) .... .' This rejection only seemed to (17) .... Sadie on in her search for a 
suitable career for Eric. It surprised no one who knew her that she reacted to the undeniably 
(18) .... disappointment of this setback in such a remarkably spirited and positive manner.
13 A engrossed B mindful C riveted D attentive
14 A proclaim B advocate C denote D underline
15 A professed B announced C aired D uttered
16 A pipe B drain C sink D gutter
17 A spur B press C incite D boost
18 A vivid B stark C bitter D hard

****

1 D 2 A 3 A 4 B 5 D 6 C 7 D 8 A 9 C
10 B 11 C 12 B 13 D 14 D 15 B A6 B 17 A
18 C

----

Professional sport
When I talk about practice, I mean something individual. If you look at professional golfers or tennis 
players, you will observe that practice (1) .... the basis of their preparation for tournaments. Of
course it does, (2) .... these are individual sports. Training is simply doing the physical work
necessary to be sufficiently fit, but practice entails making an analysis of one's game, locating its
weak points, and working to (3) .... them. If your opponent keeps winning points by serving high
to your backhand, there's no place to hide; you either have to (4) .... the weakness, or you'll keep
losing to him. He'll exploit your weaknesses mercilessly.
Part of what is fascinating, and slightly repellent, about sport lies in that curious inversion of values
(5) . . . . much that we admire in ordinary life - humility, compassion, unwillingness to take
advantage of the weakness of others - is reversed on the field of play. Professional sport is all
about winning. And, within (6) .... the more you practise (and the more you train), the better your
chances of doing so.
1 A lays B composes C enacts D forms
2 A albeit B for C as with D let alone
3 A eradicate B rid C wipe D extinguish
4 A alter B square C reform D rectify
5 A insofar B whereby C thereof D hence
6 A due B sense C reason D merit
Introduction to a magazine feature
Are your cupboards bursting at the seams, your bag full of unwanted receipts, sweet wrappers and
chewed up pens? Do you often spend ages searching for keys, or telephone numbers (7) .... down
on the backs of envelopes? If the answer is 'yes', then worry no more. The order and calm you
long for is nearer than you think. Just follow our guide to decluttering your life.
It's difficult to think clearly or creatively, to relax or (8) .... , if you live amongst piles of junk. Clutter
has a way of controlling us. When our environment is in a (9) .... , our minds can also feel
disordered. When rubbish is allowed to (10) .... up, and stagnate, a combination of frustration,
confusion and lethargy (11) .... ; we can feel stuck and unsure of our direction. Clearing out unused
and unwanted (12) .... allows us to focus more clearly. Try for yourself and see.
7 A jotted B penned C doodled D etched
8 A unfold B unleash C unload D unwind
9 A dump B chaos C mess D tip
10 A clog B build C stock D grow
11 A holds on B stands out C joins up D sets in
12 A features B items C matters D entities
Problem staff
The issue of problem staff in restaurants covers a multitude of sins. Usually poor service comes
(13) .. .. to the behaviour of an individual employee, but it's also the restaurant's responsibility.
Why should restaurant managers tolerate bad attitudes? When you do get a less than helpful
waiter, it's tempting to suggest to the manager or owner that the individual concerned might be
better employed elsewhere - not in the service industry, perhaps. (14) .... are they're already
aware of such 'attitude issues' and tolerate bad behaviour for reasons best (15) .... to themselves.
This is when it's worth remembering that a service charge isn't mandatory. (16) .... them where it
hurts - in the (17) .... packet, and eventually they might (18) .... the message.
13 A over B along Cup D down
14 A Possibilities B Chances C Eventualities D Prospects
15 A renowned B familiar C known D acknowledged
15 A Tap B Knock C Hit D Strike
17 A pay B salary C wages D earnings
18 A catch B get C take D grasp

****
1 D 2 B 3 A 4 D 5 B 6 C 7 A 8 D 9 C 10 B 11 D 12 B 13 D 14 B 15 C 16 C 17 A 18 B 

----

Listing
In Britain the badge of distinction awarded to historic buildings is unheroically called 'listing'. When
a building is listed it is (1) .... for preservation and it is expected to stand more or less indefinitely
- nobody expects it to be demolished, ever. But what is the (2) .... expectancy of, (3) .... , a
nineteenth-century terraced house? A few years ago most people assumed that such houses
would eventually wear out and be replaced - and millions were demolished in slum (4) ..... But
about 2.5 million of these terraces survive, and in some towns they are being given 'conservation
area' (5) .... , so don't expect the bulldozers there. The very low rates of demolition and
construction in the UK (6) .... that the building stock as a whole is ageing, and this has enormous
implications for the long-term sustainability of housing.
1 A branded B earmarked C minted D tagged 
2 A time B age C strength D life
3 A say B imagine C think D look
4 A removal B riddance C clearance D dispatch
5 A quality B class C rank D status
6 A mean B convey C explain D determine
Shopping in Europe
The first self-service stores opened in America in the 1920s but they didn't catch on in Europe until
later, when the French forged ahead with their massive hypermarkets. Britain (7) . . . . behind.
Although the first self-service shop and the first supermarket were opened in the early 1940s, it
was thought that British housewives did not particularly want efficiency and speed. Surveys
showed that while American shoppers complained most about delays in check-out queues, British
ones objected to being pushed and (8) .... by other customers.
The (9) . . . . of supermarket shopping is impersonality, with no mediating salesman between
shopper and goods, only the 'silent persuaders' of packaging and display. However, there is a
current (10) .... towards 'boutiques', with personal service, within supermarkets - the butcher, the
baker, the fishmonger - and small specialist shops and farmers' markets are making a (11) .... in
Britain. In France, where every (12) .... provincial town, ringed by supermarkets, retains its
specialist food shops and weekly street market, the traditional co-exists with the new.
7 A dwelled B clung C deferred D lagged
8 A thrust B shoved C heaved D jerked
9 A crux B key C gist D essence
10 A momentum B trend C craze D vogue
11 A comeback B rebound C rally D pick-up
12 A self-regarding B self-appointed C self-respecting D self-conscious
Teeth
Smile at yourself in the mirror. Do you like what you see? If not, cosmetic dentistry could be the
answer. 'Dentistry has (13) .... a long way since the days of simple fillings and extractions,' says
London dental surgeon Dr Phil Stemmer, whose client list at his Teeth For Life clinic (14) .... pop
s4cars, actresses and even royalty, although his lips are tightly (15) .... on names. 'More and more
People are turning to dentistry as a way of improving appearance,' he says. 'Shape, form, colour
and alignment all make noticeable differences to a smile, and by creating an improved smile I can
dramatically alter a person's whole (16) .... of themselves.' Top actress Julia Roberts seems to be
universally (17) .... as the 'gold standard' in smiles, and, following her lead, one of the first
things top models invest in is a perfect set of teeth to improve their chances of becoming cover-
girls (18) .....
13 A gone B been C come D done
14 A proclaims B brags C trumpets D boasts
15 A closed B glued C sealed D shut
16 A perception B observation C discernment D consciousness
17 A cheered B hailed C saluted D exalted
18 A stuf B substance C material D matter

****

1 B 2 D 3 A 4 C 5 D 6 A 7 D 8 B 9 D
10 B 11 A 12 C 13 C 14 D 15 C 16 A 17 B
18 C

----

Flight to Phoenix
I was booked on an early flight so I (1) .... no time in getting showered and dressed, and
(2) .... for the airport. It was only when I felt the aircraft leave the runway, and saw Manhattan
(3) .... into the distance beneath and behind me, that I finally began to relax.
Even at nine o'clock in the morning Phoenix was hot. It was a physical shock to walk out of
the cool, dark terminal into the bright reflection of the sunlight. Locals ambled slowly past in
short-sleeved shirts and sunglasses. In less than a minute I was sweating in my suit as I carried
my bags over to the large sign which read 'Bloomfield Weiss High Yield Bond Conference'.
They had (4) .... on white stretch limousines to take the conference participants to the hotel. Within
seconds, I was back in air-conditioned quiet again. I supposed that it was (5) .... possible to spend
all of your life in Phoenix at 18° centigrade, with only brief (6) .... of extra heat as you transferred
from air-conditioned house to air-conditioned car to air-conditioned office.
1 A used B lost C left D made
2 A headed B pressed C proceeded D set
3 A abating B withdrawing C receding D reversing
4 A laid B catered C sorted D furnished
5 A purely B perfectly C starkly D solidly
6 A gales B torrents C fits D bursts
Keas - not just pretty parrots
Few birds are as (7) .... curious as keas. New research shows how these New Zealand parrots
channel that curiosity for maximum benefit: they (8) .... up tips by watching each other. Keas are
notorious for investigating and, in the (9) .... , often destroying everything from rubbish bins to
windscreen wipers. Ludwig Huber and colleagues from the University of Vienna have found that in
keas, which live in family flocks, social learning affects patterns of curiosity. In their experiments,
the keas' task was to open a steel box with a complex locking mechanism. Two birds were
gradually trained as 'models' and then they (10) .... the task again under the watchful gaze of keas
who were new to the job. (11) .... enough, birds who had watched a demonstration had a much
higher success (12) .... than keas who had never watched one.
7 A insatiably B hungrily C thirstily D unmanageably
8 A take B lift C pick D pull
9 A procedure B process C measure D technique
10 A enacted B staged C performed D presented
11 A Certain B Sure C True D Fair
12 A proportion B percentage C occurrence D rate
Bureaucracy
Given that bureaucracy is held in such ill (13) .... today, it is hard to remember that it was once
considered a great organisational innovation. By organising the (14) .... of labour, by making
management and decision-making a profession, and by providing an order and a set of rules that
allowed  many different kinds of specialists to work in coordination toward a common (15) .... ,
bureaucracy greatly extended the breadth and depth of intelligence that organisations could
2chieve. Begun as a system of organising government activities, it has (16) .... to big business and
large organisations of all kinds.
Max Weber, who (17) .... the systematic study of bureaucracy as its role in western society began
to explode in the late nineteenth century, saw bureaucracy as both the most efficient possible
system,. and a threat to the basic liberties he (18) .... dear, thus foreshadowing the sentiments
which bureaucracy frequently evokes today.
13 A notoriety B knowledge C repute D name 
14 A division B distinction C detachment D divergence
15 A end B finish C culmination D termination
16 A carried B spread C transmitted D caught
17 A opened B sprang C launched D fired
18 A loved B felt C knew D held

****
1 B 2 A 3 C 4 A 5 B 6 D 7 A 8 C 9 B
10 C 11 B 12 D 13 C 14 A 15 A 16 B 17 C
18 D

----




